

PAULO TATYA MENTA CORINTYAIN

RANTA 1
Paulo, Yésus Hristo apostel ter Eruo indóme, ar Timoşeo hánolma, Eruo ocombenna ya ea Corintesse, as ilye i airi i ear mí quanda Acaia: 2 Lisse len, ar raine ho Eru Atarelva ar ho i Heru Yésus Hristo.
	3 Nai Eru ar Yésus Hristo Herulvo Atar nauva aistana, i Atar oraviéron ar Aino ilya tiutaleo, 4 ye vi-tiuta şangielvasse. Etta ece ven tiuta i queni i perperir ilya nostale şangiéno, i tiutalénen yanen elve nar tiutaine lo Eru. 

Paul, apostle of Jesus Christ through God's will, and Timothy our brother, to God's congregation which is in Corith, with all the holy ones that are in all of Achaia: 2 Grace to you, and peace from God our Father and from the Lord Jesus Christ.
	3 May God and the Father of Jesus Christ our Lord be blessed, the Father of mercies and God of all comfort, 4 who comforts us in our tribulation. Therefore it is possible for us to comfort the people that suffer every kind of tribulation, with the comfort with which we are comforted by God.

5 An ve i Hristo perperier nar úvie vesse, sie i tiutale ya camilve ná yando úvea i Hristonen. 6 Qui samilve şangie, ta ná tiutaleldan ar rehtieldan; hya qui nalve tiutaine, ta ná tiutaleldan ya móla tyarien le náve voronde i imye perperiessen yar yando elme perperir. 7 Ar sie estelelma len ná tanca, pan istalme i síve samilde ranta i şangiessen, tambe samuvalde yando ranta i tiutalesse.
	8 An ualve mere i penilde istya, hánor, pa i şangie ya martane men Asiasse – i anelme rácine cólanen han poldorelma, tenna sannelme i ua enge lé rehtiéva coivielma. 9 É fellelme endalmasse i  anelme nu námie qualmeva, mal ta martane tyarien me cesta varnasselma, lá immesse, mal Erusse ye orta i qualini. 10 Ho qualmeraxe ta túra etelehtanes me ar etelehtuvas me. Sesse apánielme estelelma i etelehtuvas me ata. 

5 For as the Christ's sufferings are abundant in us, so the comfort that we receive is also abundant by the Christ. 2 If we have tribulation, that is for our comfort and for our salvation; or if we are comforted, that is for our comfort that is working to cause you to be steadfast in the same sufferings which we as well suffer. 7 For thus our hope for you is firm, since we know that as you have a part in the tribulations, so you will also have a part in the comfort.
	8 For we do not wish that you lack knowledge, brothers, about the tribulation that happened to us in Asia – that we were broken by a burden beyond our strength, until we thought that there was no way of saving our life. 9 Indeed we felt in our heart that we were under a judgement of death, but that happened to cause us to seek our safety, not in ourselves, but in God who raises the dead. 10 From death-peril that great he delivered us and will he deliver us. In him we have placed our hope that he will deliver us again.

11 Yando elde polir manya arcandeldanen men, ar sie rimbali antuvar hantale rámen, i Eruannan antaina men ve hanquenta rimbe hyamiélin. 
	12 An pa si laitalmexer: *Immotuntielma *vetta i mi aire lé ar holmo Erun, lá sailiénen hráveva mal Erulissenen, elengielme i mardesse – or ilqua elden. 13 An tecilme lenna munta hequa i nati yar polilde henta ar hanya. Samin i estel i aqua hanyuvaldet tenna i metta, 14 ve ahánielde mi ranta, lávala len laita inde pa elme, ve ece elmen care pa elde, i Heru Yésuo auresse.

11 You as well can help with your petition for us, and so numerous ones will give thanks on our behalf, for the grace given us as answer to many prayers. 
	12 For concerning this we praise ourselves: Our conscience witnesses that in a holy manner and sincerely to God, not with wisdom of [the] flesh but by grace, we have behaved in the world – above everything to you. 13 For we write to you nothing except the things that you can read and understand. I have the hope that you will fully understand them until the end, 14 as you have understoood in part, allowing you to praise yourselves concerning us, as we can do concerning you, on the day of the Lord Jesus.

	15 Nála tanca pa si mernen nóvo tule lenna, antien len attea casta alassen. 16 Apa hautie aselde mernen lelya Maceronianna, ar nanwénala Maceroniallo, náve manyaina lo elde i yestasse lendanyo Yúreanna. 17 Mérala ta, lau anen acca léra? Hya i nati yar carin mehtinya, ma mernen caritat mi lé i hráveo, ar sie enger asinye 'Ná, Ná' ar 'Ui, ui'? 18 Mal ve Eru ná sarta, questalma lenna ua Ná ananta Ui. 19 An i Eruion, Yésus Hristo, ye náne carna sinwa mici le ter elme – ta ná, ter inye ar Silváno ar Timoşeo – úne carna Ná ananta Ui, mal Ná teramárie sesse. 20 An lá címala manen rimbe Eruo vandar nar, sesse samilte Nálta. Etta yando ter sé i Násie ná quétina Erunna lo elve, alcareryan. 21 Mal ye acárie lé ar mé tance i Hriston, ar ye *ilívie vi, ná Eru – 22 sé ye yando apánie *lihtarya vesse ar ánie ven varnasse i faireo endalvasse.
	23 Ono inye yale Eru ve astarmo véra cuilenyanna: Rehtien le nyérello uan utúlie Corintenna. 24 Lá i nalme heruvi savieldo, mal molilme aselde alassedan, an i saviénen tarilde. 

	15 Being certain of this I wished beforehand to come to you, to give you a second reason for joy. 16 After pausing with you I wished to go to Macedonia, and returning from Macedonia, to be helped by you at the start of my journey to Judea. 17 Wishing that, surely I was not too free? Or the things that I make my goal, did I wish to do them in the manner of the flesh, and so [there] was with me 'Yes, Yes' and 'No, no'? 18 But as God is trusty, our speech to you is not Yes and yet No. 19 For the Son of God, Jesus Christ, who was made known among you through us – that is, through me and Silvanus and Timothy – was not made Yes and yet No, but Yes has remained in him. 20 For not heeding [= no matter] how many God's promises are, in him they have their Yes. Therefore also through him the Amen is spoken to God by us, for his glory. 21 But [the one] who has made you and us firm for the Christ, and who has annointed us, is God – 22 he who also has put his seal on us and has given us security of the spirit in our heart.
	But I call God as witness against my own life: [It was] to save you from grief that I did not come to Corinth. 24 Not that we are lords of your faith, but we work with you for your joy, for by the faith you stand.

RANTA 2
An nat sina ná cilmenya: i uan tuluva lenna ata nyéresse. 2 An qui tyarin nyére len, man antuva nin alasse hequa i quén yen inye atyárie nyére? 3 Ar etta tencen ve carnen, i íre túlen uan samumne nyére i quenillon in mauyane tala nin alasse. An anen tanca pa elde illi, i alassenyasse illi mici le samumner ranta. 4 An et hoa şangiello, moiala endanyasse ar arwa rimbe nírion, tencen lenna – lá tyarien len nyére, mal lavien len ista i úvea melme ya samin len. 
	5 Mal qui aiquen atyárie nyére, uas atyárie sa inyen, mal mi lesta – lá carpien mi acca naraca lé – illin mici le.

CHAPTER 2
Fot this thing is my choice: that I will not come to you again in grief. 2 For if I cause grief to you, who will give me joy expect the person to whom I have caused grief? 3 And therefore I wrote as I did, that when I came I was not going to have grief from the people for whom [it] compelled to bring me joy. For I was sure about you all, that in my joy all among you were going to have a part. 4 And out of great tribulation, being afflicted in my heard and having many tears, I wrote to you – not to cause you grief, but to allow you to know the abundant love that I have for you.
	5 For if anyone has caused grief, he has not caused it to me, but in a measure – not to speak in too harsh a manner – to all among you. 

6 Íre sie anaies naityana lo i amarimbar, ta farya taite neren. 7 Etta quera inde ar i mende ásen apsene ar áse tiuta, hya taite nér cé nauva ammátina acca tumna nyérenen. 8 Sie hortan le i tanuvalde melmelda séva. 9 An tana mehten tecin yando tyastien le, istien qui cimilde i canwar ilye natissen. 10 Ilqua ya apsenilde, yando inye apsene. Ilqua ya inye apesénie – qui apesénien *aiqua – anaie márieldan epe Hristo, 11 pustien Sátan rahtiello or vi; an ualve pene istya pa panoryar.
	12 Sí íre túlen Troasenna carien i evandilyon sinwa, ar fenna náne nin latyaina i Herusse, 13 uan sáme sére fairenyasse pan uan hirne Títo hánonya; mal quenten namárie téna ar oante Maceronianna. 
	14 Mal hantale na Erun, ye illume tulyar me apairesse as i Hristo, ar ter elme vintas mi ilya nóme i ne i istyo pa sé!

6 When he has so been shamed by the majority [amarimbar = the more numerous], that is enough for such a man. 7 Therefore turn yourselves [around] and instead forgive him and confort him, or such a man will perhaps be consumed by too deep a grief. 8 Thus I urge you that you will show your love of him. 9 For for that purpose I write also to test you, to know if you heed the commands in all things. 10 Everything that you forgive, I also forgive. Everything that I have forgiven – if I have forgiven anything – has been for your good before Christ, 10 to stop Satan from reaching over you; for we do not lack knowledge about his plans.
	12 Now when I came to Troas to make the gospel known, and a door was opened for me in the Lord, 13 I did not have rest in my spirit since I did not find Titus my brother; but I said farewell to them and went away to Macedonia.
	14 But thanks be to God, who always leads us in victory with the Christ, and through us he spreads in every place the scent of the knowledge about him!

15 An Erun nalme Hristo lisse ne, imíca i nauvar rehtaine ar i nauvar nancarne  16 – i teldain, qualmeo ne ya tala qualme, mal i minyain, coiviéno ne ya tala coivie. Ar man farya sine natin? 17 An ualme care mancale Eruo quettanen, ve rimbali carir, mal quetilme holmo, ve mentaine lo Eru ar tírine lo Eru, i Hristosse.

15 For to God we are Christ's sweet scent, among [those] that will be saved and [those] that will be destroyed 16 – to the last ones [= the latter], a scent of death which brings death, but to the first ones [= the former], a scent of life that brings life. And who is sufficient for these things? 17 For we do not make trade with God's word, as numerous ones do, but we speak sincerely, as sent by God and watched by God, in Christ.

RANTA 3
Ma ata antalme mára *vettie immen? Hya cé samilme maure mára *vettiéva len, hya camielman sa lello? 2 Mentalma elde ná, técina eldalmasse ar sinwa ar cendaina lo ilye atani. 3 An ná aşcénima i nalde menta Hristollo, yáve núromolielmo, técina lá moronen mal i coirea Eruo fairenen, lá *palmassen ondova, mal *palmassen hráveva – endassen.

CHAPTER 3
Do we again give a good witness to ourselves? Or perhaps we have need of good witness to you, or for us to receive it from you? 2 Our letter [menta: message] is you, written in our heart and known and read by all men. 3 For [it] is easily seen that you are a letter from Christ, a fruit of our ministry, written not with ink but by the spirit of the living God, not on tablets of stone, but on tablets of flesh – on hearts.

	4 Ar si ná i tanca savie ya samilme Erusse ter i Hristo. 5 Lá i elme, mi imme, faryar notien *aiqua ve qui túles immello, mal fárelma tule Erullo. 6 Sé carne me fárie núror vinya véreo, lá técina şanyeo, mal i faireo; an i técina şanye nahta, mal i faire anta coivie.
	7 Mal qui i núromolie qualmeva i técina şanyenen náne tulcaina mi alcar ta túra i náne úcárima i Israelindin yéta Móseo cendele, i alcarnen ya enge cendeleryasse – alcar ya firumne – 8 ma ua i núromolie i faireva nauva alcarinqua ambela ta? 9 An qui i núrumolie yanen queni náner námine ulce náne alcarinqua, i núromolie ya care queni faile same alcar ole ambe úvea. 10 An mi natto sina, ta ya yá sáme alcar sí ua same alcar aqua, castanen i alcaro ya lahta sa. 11 An qui ta ya firumne náne tulcaina mi alcar, ole ambe ta ya lemya samuva alcar. 

	4 And this is the firm faith that we have in God through the Christ. 5 Not that we, in ourselves, are sufficient to count anything as if it came from ourselves, but our sufficiency comes from God. 6 He made us sufficient [= capable] servants of a new covenant, not of a written law, but of the spririt; for the written law kills, but the spirit gives life.
	7 But if the ministry of death by the written law was established in a glory so great that it was impossible for the Children of Israel to look at the face of Moses, because of the glory that was in his face – a glory that was going to fade – 8 will not the ministry of the spirit be glorious far beyond that? 9 For if the ministry by which people were judged evil was glorious, the ministry that makes people righteous has a glory much more abundant. 10 For in this matter, that which formerly had glory now does not have glory at all, by reason of the glory that surpasses it. 11 For if that which was going to fade was established in glory, much more will that which remains have glory.

	12 Etta, pan samilve taite estel, nalve ita canye, 13 ar ualve care ve Móses, ye panyane vaşar cendeleryasse, pustien i Israelindi ceniello metta i fifírula alcaro. 14 Mal sámalta náne cárina hranga. An tenna aure sina i imya vaşar lemya ar ua ortaina i hentiesse i yára véreva, pan nas panyaina oa i Hristonen. 15 É tenna aure sina, quiquie Móses ná hentaina, vaşar caita endaltanna. 16 Mal íre querilte inte i Herunna, i vaşar ná mapaina oa. 17 Mal i Heru ná i Faire, ar yasse i Heruo faire ea, ea lérie. 18 Ar íre illi mici vi, ú vaşaro tópala cendelelva, *nanantar i Heruo alcar ve cilintilla, nalve vistaine mir ilcerya, alcarello alcarenna –  ve ná cárina lo i Heru, i Faire.

	12 Therefore, since we have such hope, we are very bold, 13 and we do not do like Moses, who put a veil on his face, to stop the Children of Israel from seeing the end of the fading glory. 14 But their mind was made hard. For until this day the same veil remains and is not lifted at the reading of the old covenant, since it is put away by means of the Christ. 15 Indeed until this day, whenever Moses is read, a veil lies upon their heart. 16 But when they turn [Q: turn themselves] to the Lord, the veil is taken away. 17 But the Lord is the Spirit, and where the Lord's spirit is, [there] is freedom. 18 And when all among us, without [any] veil covering our face, give back the Lord's glory like a mirror, we are changed into his appearance, from glory to glory – as is done by the Lord, the Spirit.

RANTA 4
Etta, pan samilme núromolie sina i Erulissenen antaina men, ualme hehta huorelma. 2 Mal ehehtielme i nurtaine nati yar talar nucumie, an ualme lenga curunen. Ente, ualme *ñauta Eruo quetta, mal taniénen i nanwie antalme immen mára *vettie epe Eruo cendele, ilye atanion *immotuntien. 3 Qui evandilyonelma é ná halda, nas halda ho i nauvar nancarne. 4 An randa sino aino acárie *cénelóra i sáma ion uar save, pustien caltiello i cala ho i evandilyon pa i Hristo alcar, sé ye ná Eruo emma.
	5 An ualme care imme sinwe, mal Hristo Yésus ve Heru, íre elme nar mólildar, Yésuo márien. 6 An Eru ná ye canne: "Cala á calta et i morniello", ar sé acaltie endalmanna, calyala i istya pa Eruo alcar mi Yésus Hristo cendele. 7 Mal samilme harma sina cemne venessen, tyárala i úvea túre náve Erullo ar lá elmello. 

CHAPTER 4
Therefore, since we have this ministry by the grace given us, we do not abandon our courage. 2 But we have abandoned the hidden things that cause humiliation [or, shame], for we do not behave with cunning. Furthermore, we do not falsify God's word, but by showing the truth we give ourselves good witness  before the face of God, to the conscience of all men. 3 If our gospel is indeed veiled, it is veiled from [those] that will be destroyed. 4 For the god of this age has made blind the mind of [the ones] who do not believe, to stop from shining the light from the gospel of Christ's glory, he who is God's image.
	5 For we do not make ourselves known, but Christ Jesus as Lord, while we are your thralls, for the good of Jesus. 6 For God is [the one] who commanded: "Let light shine out of darkness",  and he has shone upon our heart, illuminating the knowledge about God's glory in the face of Jesus Christ. 7 But we have this treasure in earthen vessels, causing the abundant power to be from God and not from ourselves.

	8 Nalme nírine ilya tiello, mal ualme nómesse ta náha i ualme pole leve; ualme ista mana caruvalme, mal ualme aqua ú uşweo; 9 nalme roitaine, mal lá ú estelo; nalme hátine undu, mal ualme nancarne. 10 Illume perperilme hroalmasse i nahtie Yésuva, i yando Yésuo coivie nauva tanaina hroalmasse. 11 An elme i nar coirie nar oi antaine olla qualmen castanen Yésuo, i mehten i yando Yésuo coivie nauva tanaina fírima hrávelmasse. 12 Sie qualme móla messe, mal coivie lesse.
	13 Mal pan samilme i imya faire saviéva – ve ná técina, "Sáven, etta quenten" – yando elme savir, ar etta yando quetilme, 14 istala i sé ye ortane Yésus yando ortuva mé ar tyaruva me tare imíca le.

	8 We are pressed from every direction, but we are not in a place that narrow that we cannot move; we do not know what we are to do, but we are not wholly without escape; 9 we are persecuted, but not without hope; we are thrown down, but we are not undone. 10 Always we suffer in our body the killing of Jesus, that also Jesus' life will be shown in our body. 11 For we that are alive are ever given over to death by reason of Jesus, for the purpose that also Jesus' life will be shown in our mortal flesh. 12 Thus death is at work in us, but life in you. 
	13 But since we have the same spirit of believing – as is written, "I believed, therefore I spoke" – we as well believe, and therefore we also speak, 14 knowing that he who raised Jesus will also raise us and will make [tyar-, cause] us stand among you. 

15 An ilqua ná márieldan, ar sie i Erulisse, rahtala queninnar oi ambe rimbe, taluva amba hantalenna, Eruo alcaren.
	16 Etta ualme hehta huorelma, mal ómu etya atanelma yeryea, mitya atanelma ná envinyanta aurello aurenna. 17 An ómu i roitie ná autala ar ua lunga, manweas men oira lesta alcaro oi ambe úvea, 18 íre yétalme lá i cénimar, mal i úcénimar. An i nati yar mo cene autuvar, mal i úcénimar nar oire.

15 For everything is for your good, and so the grace, reaching to people ever more numerous, will bring more thanksgiving, to the glory of God.
	16 Therefore we do not abandon our courage, but although our outer man is wearing out, our inner man is renewed from day to day. 17 For though the persecution is passing and is not heavy, it is preparing for us an eternal measure of glory ever more abundant, 18 while we look not at the visible [things], but at the invisible. For the things which one sees shall pass, but the invisible ones are eternal.

RANTA 5
An istalme i qui coalma mariéva cemende nauva nancarna, camuvalme ataque Erullo, coa lá cárina mainen, oialea mi menel. 2 An marelma sinasse é ñonalme, milyala panya immesse meneldea marelma.

CHAPTER 5
For we know that if our house of dwelling on earth will be destroyed, we shall receive a building from God, a house not made with hands, everlasting in heaven. 2 For in this our home we do groan, longing to put on ourselves our heavenly home.

3 Sie, apa panie sa immesse, ualme nauva hírine helde. 4 Íre ealme *lancoa sinasse é ñonalme nu i cóla, an merilme, lá panya sa oa, mal panya messe i exe, tyárala ya ná fírima náve ammátina i coiviénen. 5 Mal ye acárie men nat sina ná Eru, ye ánie men i faire ve varnasse i camuvalmes.
	6 Etta, illume arwe huoreo, istalme i íre marilme i hroasse, nalme oa i Herullo – 7 an vantalme saviénen, lá ceniénen. 8 Mal samilme huore ar merir ambe náve oa i hroallo ar mare as i Heru. 9 Etta mehtelma ná i nauvalme írime sen, lá címala qui marilme óse hya oa sello. 10 An illi mici vi taruvar epe i námohamma i Hristova, ar sie ilquen camuva *paityalerya i natin cárine i hroanen, máre hya ulce.

3 Thus, after putting that on ourselves, we will not be found naked. 4 When we exist in this tent we indeed groan under the burden, for we wish, not to put it away, but to put on ourselves the other, causing [that] which is mortal to be devoured by life. 5 But [he] that has made for us this thing is God, who has given us the spirit as a security that we will receive it.
	6 Therefore, always having courage, we know that when we dwell in the body, we are away from the Lord – 7 for we walk by faith, not by seeing. 8 But we have courage and wish more to be away from the body and to dwell with the Lord. 9 Therefore our goal is that if we will be pleasing [írime, desirable] to him, not heeding [= no matter] if we dwell with him or away from him. 10 For all among us shall stand before the judgement seat of the Christ, and so everyone will receive his reward for the things done in the flesh, good or bad. 

11 Etta, istala i rucie i Herullo tulyalme atani savielmannar, mal anaielme cárine úfanwie Erun. Ono samilme i estel i nalme yando úfanwie *immotuntieldan. 12 Ualme anta immen mára *vettie epe le, mal antalme len ecie laitien inde elmenen, samieldan hanquenta in laitar inte etya ilcen, mal lá i endan. 13 An qui anelme ettesse sámalmo, ta náne Erun; qui sámelme mále sámo, ta ná elden. 14 An i Hristo melme mauya men, an sie anámielme: Er qualle rimbalin, é illi qualler, 16 ar illin qualles, mérala i té i nar coirie uar ambe samuva coivie inten, mal sen ye qualle tien ar náne ortaina.

11 Therefore, knowing the fear of the Lord we lead men to our beliefs, but we have been made manifest [úfanwie, unveiled] to God. But we have the hope that we will also be manifest to your conscience. 12 We do not give ourselves good witness before you, but we give you an opportunity to praise yourselves by means of us, for you to have an answer to [those] that praise themselves for outer appearance, but not for the heart. 13 For if we were out of our mind, that was for God; if we had health of mind, that is for you. 14 For the Lord's love compels us, for so we have judged: One died for numerous ones, indeed all died, 16 and for all he died, wishing that they that are alive will not [any]more have life for themselves, but for him that died for them and was raised.

	16 Etta ho sí ualme ista aiquen i hrávenen. Yando qui isintielme i Hristo i hrávenen, ualme ista se sie ambe. 17 Etta, qui aiquen ná i Hristosse, náse vinya onna; i yárar avánier; yé, utúlier vinyali! 18 Mal ilqua ná i Ainollo, ye carne raine imbi inse ar elme ter Hristo ar antane men i núromolie rainecariéva. 19 Sie ece Erun i Hristonen care raine imbi inse ar i mar, lá nótala téna ongweltar, ar antanes i quetta rainecariéno men.
	20 Etta nalme *ráqueni rá Hriston, ve qui Eru carne arcande ter me. Hristo mende hortalme: Cara raine imbi lé ar Eru! 21 Sé ye ua sinte úcare carnes úcare elven, návelvan Eruo failie ter sé.

	16 Therefore from now we do not know anybody by the flesh. Also [/even] if we have known the Christ by the flesh, we do not know him so [any]more. 17 Therefore, if anyone is in Christ, he is a new creature; the old [things] have gone away; behold! new ones have come. 18 But everything is from God, who made peace between himself and us through Christ and gave us the ministry of peace-making. 19 Thus it is possible for God by the Christ to make peace between himself and the world, not counting against them their crimes, and he gave the word of peacemaking to us.
	20 Therefore we are representatives on behalf of Christ, as if God made request through us. In Christ's place [men, locative mende] we urge: Make peace between you and God! 21 He that did not know sin he made sin for us, for us to be God's righteousness through him.

RANTA 6
Mólala óse yando hortalme le: Áva came Eruo lisse muntan! 2 An quetis: "Írima lúmesse lye-hlassen, ar i auresse rehtiéva lye-manyanen." Yé, sí ea i írima lúme! Yé, sí ea i aure rehtiéva!

	5 Laume carilme *aiqua ya queruva queni oa, lá mérala i núromolielma nauva vahtaina. 4 Mal mi ilya lé ñetilme mara *vettie ve Eruo núror – túra voronwiesse, şangiessen, mauressen, hrangiessen, 5 palpiessen, mandossen, *perestiessen, mótiessen, lómissen ú húmeo, peniessen matsova, 6 poiciesse, istyasse, cólesse, moiciesse, aire feasse, melmesse ú *imnetiéno, 7 nanwa questasse, Eruo túresse, arwe i carmar failiéva mi forma yo hyarma, 8 alcaresse ar *naityalesse, arwe mára esseo hya ulca esseo, ve queni i tyarir exi ranya ananta nar sarte, 9 ve úsinwe ananta mai sinwe, ve quálala ar yé! nalme coirie, ve cámala paimesta ananta lá nance, 10 ve arwe nyéreo, mal oi quante alasseo, ve penye, mal cárala rimbali lárie, ve qui samilme munta ananta samir ilqua.

CHAPTER 6
Laboring with him we also urge you: Do not receive God's grace for nothing! [/in vain!] 2 For he says: "In a desirable [acceptable] time I heard you, and on the day of salvation I helped you!" Behold, now is the desirable hour! Behold, now is the day of salvation!
	5 We do not do anything at all which will turn people away, not wishing that our ministry will be stained. 4 But in every manner we get good witness as God's servants – in great steadfastness, in tribulations, in needs, in difficulties, 5 in beatings, in disturbances, in toilings, in nights without sleep, in lacking food, 6 in purity, in knowledge, in patience, in gentleness, in holy spirit, in love without hypocrisy, 7 in truthful speech, in God's power, having the weapons of judice in right hand and left hand, 8 in glory and shape, having a good name and an evil name, as people who make others err and yet are trusty, 8 as unknown and yet well known, as dying and behold! we are alive, as receiving chastisement and yet not slain, 10 as having grief, but ever full of joy, as poor, but making numerous ones rich, as if we have nothing and yet have everything.

11 Antonya ná láta len, Corintyar, endanya ná palyaina! 12 Elde uar mi náha nóme aselme, mal véra endalda náha ná. 13 Etta, antien men i imya ya elme antar len, á palya endalda! 
	14 Áva na panyaina nu *alavéla yanta as queni i uar save. An mana ná ya failie ar *şanyelórie samir uo? Hya mana i *uome imbi cala ar mornie? 15 Ar manen polir Hristo ar Vélial náve er sámo? Hya mana ranta same quén ye save as quén ye ua save? An elve nar corda i Coirea Ainova, ve Eru equétie: "Maruvan aselte ar vantuvan imíca te, ar inye nauva Ainolta, ar té nauvar lienya. 17 Etta á auta tello ar á lenweta," quete i Héru, "ar áva appa i úpoica, ar inye camuva le. 18 Ar inye nauva len Atar, ar elde nauvar nin yondoli ar yeldeli," quete i Héru Ilúvala.

11 Our mouth is open to you, Corinthians, our heart is widened! 12 You are not in a narrow place with us, but your own heart is narrow. 13 Therefore, in order to give us the same that we give to you, widen your heart!
	14 Do not be put under an uneven yoke with the people that do not believe. For what is [it] that justice and lawlessness have together? Or what is the community between light and darkness? 15 And how can Christ and Belial be of one mind? Or what part does a person who believe have with a person that does not believe? For we are a temple of the Living Deity, as God has said: "I shall dwell with them and walk among them, and I will be their God, and they will be my people. 17 Therefore pass away from them and leave," says the Lord, "and do not touch the unclean, and I shall receive you. 18 For I shall be for you a Father, and you shall be for be sons and daughters," says the Lord Almighty.

RANTA 7
Etta, pan samilve vandar sine, meldar, alve poita inwe ilya vaxello hráveo ar faireo, cestala ilvana aire, ruciesse Erullo. 
	2 Ámen palya endalda! *Úquenen acárielme ulco, *úquen ahastielme, *úquennen acámielme ñetie!
	3 Sie uan quete namien le ulce, an equétien nóvo i nalde endalmasse, uo qualmen ar coivien.   4 Samin túra lérie quetiéva len, túra *immolaitie eldenen. Nanye quátina tiutalénen, samin úvea alasse mi ilya roitielma. 
	5 É ualme sáme sére i hroan íre túlelme Maceronianna – enger etye costiéli, mitye ruciéli. 

CHAPTER 7
Therefore, since we have these promises, beloved ones, let us cleanse ourselves from every stain of flesh and of spirit, seeking perfect holiness, in the fear of God.
	2 Widen your heart to us! To no one have we done evil, no one have we marred, by no one have we received profit!
	3 So I do not speak in order to judge you evil, for I have spoken beforehand that you are in our heart, together for death and for life. 4 I have great freedom of speech toward you, great boasting [lit. self-praise] by you. I am filled with comfort, I have abundant joy in all our persecution.
	5 Indeed we did not have rest for the body when we came to Macedonia – [there] were outer quarrels, internal fears. 

6 Ananta Eru, ye tiuta i naldar, tiutane mé Títo tuliénen, 7 ananta lá tulieryanen erinqua, mal yando i tiutalénen yanen anes tiutaina pa elde, íre nyarnes manen milyalde, manen samilde nyére, manen şúlelda urya nin – ya tyarne ni same alasse en ambe túra. 
	8 An yando qui antanen len nyére mentanyanen, uan same attie sanweli pa sa. Sámen attie sanweli yá – an cenin i mentanya tyarne len nyére, ómu şinta lúmen eryave – 9 ananta nanye valima sí, lá pan sámelde nyére, mal pan i nyére le-tulyane inwistenna. An i nyére ya sámelde náne Eruo, i munta nauva len vanwa elmenen. 10 An i nyére ya ná Eruo tyare inwis pa ya *úquen pole same attie sanwi, mal i mardo nyére tyare qualme. 11 An yé! nat sina imma – i sámelde nyére ya náne Eruo – manen túra ná i horme ya atyáries! Manen atárielde ama inden! Manen horyalde! Manen milyalde! Manen şúlelda urya! Manen merilde paimeta ulco! Ilquasse atánieldexer poice natto sinasse. 

6 And yet God, who comforts the lowly ones, comforted us by the coming of Titus, 7 and yet not by his coming alone, but also by the comfort with which he was comforted concerning you, when he told how you long, how you have grief, how your spirit burns for me – which caused me to have joy still greater.
	8 And yet if I gave you grief with my letter [menta: message], I do not have second thoughts about it. I had second thoughts formerly – for I see that my letter caused you grief, though for a short time only – 9 and yet I am happy now, not since you had grief, but since the grief led you to a change of mind [or, repentance]. For the grief that you had was of God, that nothing will be lost to you because of us. 10 For the grief that is of God causes a mind-change concerning which no one can have second thoughts, but the world's grief causes death. 11 For behold! this thing itself – that you had grief which is of God – how great is the urgency that it has caused! How you stood up for yourselves! How you are provoked! [horya-, have an impulse] How you long! How your spirit burns! How you wish to punish evil! In everything you have shown yourselves clean in this matter.

	12 Ómu tencen lenna é uan carne sie márien i queno ye carne ulco, hya i quenen ye perpére i ulco, mal tencen carien hormelda elmen aşcénima imíca le, epe Eru. 13 Etta anaielme tiutaine.
	Mal napánina tiutalelman sámelme alasse en ambe úvea Títo alassenen, an fairerya anaie envinyanta lo le illi. 14 An qui alaitien le epe se, uan anaie naityana, mal ve equétielme ilye nati len nanwiesse, sie yando laitalelma epe Títo anaie tanaina nanwa. 15 Ente, samis en ambe tumne felmeli lenna íre enyalis manen cimnelde canwaryar, manen camneldes ruciesse ar paliesse. 16 Hirin alasse i istyasse i mi ilya lé polin same huore eldenen.

	12 Though I wrote to you I indeed did not do so for the good of the person who did evil, or for the person who suffered the evil, but I wrote to make your urgency [or, diligence] for us easily seen among you, before God. 13 Therefore we have been comforted.
	But added [or, in addition] to our comfort we have also joy still more abundant by the joy of Titus, for his spirit has been renewed by you all. 14 For if I have praised him before you, I have not been shamed, but as we have said all things to you in truth, so also our praise before Titus has been shown true. 15 Furthermore, he has still more profound feelings towards you when he recalls how you heeded his commands, how you received him in fear and trembling. 16 I find joy in the knowledge that in every manner I can have courage by means [or, reason] of you.

RANTA 8
Sí cáralme sinwa len, hánor, i lisse ya Eru ánie Maceronio ocombin. 2 An íre perpérelte túra tyastie şangiénen, úvelta alasseva ar tumna penielta carnet úvea i lárea merie antiéva ya sámelte. 3 An antanelte ve ence tien; é nanye astarmo i antanelte han ya ence tien, ar véra nirmeltanen. 4 Arcanelte me rimbe arcandelínen, mérala came i lisse samiéva ranta i núromoliesse i airin. 5 Ualte antane eryave ve i estel ya sámelme, mal minyave antanelte inte i Herun ar elmen, Eruo indómenen. 6 Etta hortanelme Títo i telyumnes i anna ya yá *yestanes hosta imíca le. 7 Ve nalde úvie mi ilqua – mi savie ar quetta ar istya ar ilya horme, ar mí melme ya samilme len – nai nauvalde yando úvie mi antielda!

CHAPTER 8
Now we are making known to you, brothers, the grace that God has given to the congregations of Macedonia. 2 For when they suffered a great test by tribulation, their abundance of joy and their profound poverty made abundant the rich desire of giving that they had. 3 For they gave as was possible to them; indeed I am a witness that they gave beyond what was possible for them, and by their own will. 4 They petitioned us with many petitions, wishing to receive the grace of having a part in the service for the holy ones. 5 They did not gave only according to the hope that we had, but firstly they gave themselves to the Lord and to us, by God's will. 6 Therefore we urged Titus that he was going to complete the gift that he formerly started to collect among you. 7 Like you are abundant in everything – in faith and word and knowledge and all urgency, and in the love that we have for you – may you also be abundant in your giving!

8 Uan quete ta ve canwa, mal exion hormenen merin tyasta qui melmelda ná yando nanwa. 9 An istalde Yésus Hristo Herulvo lisse – i ómu anes lárea anes cárina penya márieldan, náveldan cárine lárie penieryanen.
	10 Ar pa ta antan sanwenyar, an ta nauva aşea elden i *yestaner, lá i carie erinqua, mal yando merielda caritas, er loa yá. 11 Sí, tá, á telya yando i carie! Tambe anelde mérala caritas, síve yando mára ná qui telyaldes, et yallo samilde. 12 An qui ea i nirme, nas írima yanen mo same, lá yanen mo ua same. 13 An mehtinya ua i exi nauvar manyaine, íre nati nar urde len, 14 mal i illi nauvar vávie. Lú sinasse elde samir úve ar polir manya i perperir maure. Mi hyana lú té samuvar úve ar polir manya lé, íre elde perperir maure. Sie illi nauvar vávie, 15 ve ná técina: "I quén arwa olyo ua sáme acca olya, ar i quén arwa pityo ua sáme acca pitya."

8 I do not say that as a command, but by the urgency [earnestness, diligence] of others I want to test if your love is also true. 9 For you know the grace of Jesus Christ our Lord – that although he was rich he was made poor for your good, for you to be made rich by his poverty.
	10 And concerning that I give my thoughts, for that will be beneficial for you who began, not the doing alone, but also your wishing to do it, one year ago. 11 Now, then, complete also the doing! As you were willing to do it, so [it] is also good if you complete it, out of [that] which you have. 12 For if [there] is the will, it is desirable by [that] which one has, not by [that] which one does not have. 13 For my goal is not that others will be helped, while things are difficult for you, 14 but that all will be equal. At this time you have abundance and can help [those] who suffer need. At another time they will have abundance and can help you, when you suffer need. Thus all will be equal, 15 as [it] is written: "The person having much did not have too much, and the person having little did not have too little."

	16 Hantale Erun, pan panyanes i imya horme elden Títo endasse, 17 an camnes i hortale, ar pan horyanes ole, ménas lenna véra cilmeryanen. 18 Mal mentealme óse háno yeo laitale ivintie ter ilye i ocombi molieryanen i evandilyonen. 19 Lá ta erinqua, mal anes yando panyaina lo i ocombi ve sartonya, lelyala aselme ire colilme i hostie ya ortirilme, Eruo alcaren ar tanien mára nirmelma. 20 Merilme pusta aiquen quetiello ulco pa me pa i anna ya samilme hepielmasse, 21 an mehtelma ná i caruvalme ya mára ná, lá mí Heruo hendu erinque, mal yando mi atanion hendu.

	16 Thanks to God, since he put the same urgency for you in the heart of Titus, 17 for he received the [sence of] urgency, and since he set out with great vigor [or: felt a strong impulse], he is going to you by his own choice. 18 But we are sending with him a brother whose praise has spread through all the congregations because of his work for the gospel. 19 Not that alone, but he was also placed by the congregations as my companion, going with us while we carry the collection that we oversee, to the glory of God and to show our good will. 20 We want to stop anyone from speaking evil about us concerning the gift that we have in our keeping, 21 for our goal is that we will do [that] which is good, not in the Lord's eyes alone, but also in men's eyes.

22 Ente, mentalme aselte hánolma, ye rimbave atyastielme rimbe nattolissen ar ihírier i tanas horme molieryasse. Savis tancave i nalde sarte, ar etta molis en ambe túra hormenen. 23 Pa Títo: Masserya ná asinye, ar molis asinye márieldan. Pa i hyane hánor, nalte mentaine lo i ocombi ar nar Hristo alcar. 24 Etta á tana tien melmelda ar lava tien ista i le-laitanen epe i ocombi mára castanen.

22 Furthermore, we send with them our brother, whom we frequently have tested in numerous matters and have found that he shows urgency in his work. He firmly believes that you are trusty, and therefore he works with still greater urgency. 23 Concerning Titus: His share is with me, and he works with me for your good. Concerning the other brothers, they are sent by the congregtaions and are Christ's glory. 24 Therefore show them your love and let them know that I praised you before the congregations for a good reason.

RANTA 9
Sí pa i núromolie i airin: Uan same anwa maure tecien len, 2 an istan i nalde mérala. Etta le-laitan  Maceroniasse, quétala i Acaia náne manwa er loa yá, ar uryala şúlelda avaltie i amarimbar. 3 Mal mentean i hánor, i laitalelma pa elde ua nauva lusta pa natto sina, mal ve equétien é nauvalde manwe. 4 Uan mere i tuluvar quelli Maceroniallo asinye ar hiruvar le úmanwaine, ar sie elme – lá quetien elde – nauvar nucumne pan anelme ta tance. 

CHAPTER 9
Now concerning the ministry for the holy ones: I do not have [any] real reason to write to you, 2 for I know that you are willing. Therefore I praise you in Macedonia, saying that Achaia was ready one year ago, and your burning spirit has spurred [valta-] the majority [amarimbar, more numerous ones]. 3 But I am sending the brothers, that my praise concerning you will not be empty in this matter, but as I have said you will indeeed be ready. 4 I do not wish that people are to come from Macedonia with me and will find you unprepared, for so we – not to say you – will be humiliated because we were so sure.

5 Etta sannen i mauyane menta i hánor epe ni lenna, carien manwa nóvo i aistana anna pa ya antanelde vanda yá. Sie é nauvas manwa ve aistana anna, ar lá maustanen. 6 Ya quétan ná si: Sé ye rere pitya yando samuva pitya yávie, ar sé ye rere úve yando samuva úvea yávie. 7 Lava ilquenen care ve icílies endaryasse, lá nurrula hya maustanen, an Eru mele ye ná valima antien. 8 Ar Eru pole anta len ilya lisse úvesse, tyarien le illume same ilqua fáresse ar úve ilya mára cardan, 9 ve anaie técina: "Ivinties, ánies penyain; failierya lemya tennoio." 10 Mal ye anta erde yen rere ar masta matien antuva len erdelda ar caruva sa úvea, ar failieldo yávi caruvas lárie.

5 Therefore I thought that it was necessary to send the brothers before me to you, to make ready beforehand the blessed gift of which you gave promise formerly. Thus it will indeed be ready as a blessed gift, and not by compulsion. 6 What I am saying is this: He who sows little will also have a small harvest, and he that sows an abundance will also have an abundant harvest. 7 Let everyone do as he has chosen in his heart, not grumbling or by compulsion, for God loves [the one] that is happy to give. 8 And God can give you every grace in abundance, to case you to always have everything in sufficiency and an abundance for every good deed, 9 as has been written: "He has scattered, he has given to poor ones; his righteousness remains forever." 10 But [he] who gives seed to [the one] who sows and bread for eating will give you your seed and will make it abundant, and the fruits of your righteousness he will make rich.

11 Mi ilqua nalde cárine lárie, lávala len anta lérave mi ilya lé, ar sie Eru camuva hantale elvenen. 12 An núromolie sina ua carna eryave quatien i airion mauri, mal tyaris yando úve hantaléva Erun. 13 Núromolie sina tana voronwelda íre nalde tyastaine. Etta antalte alcar Erun, pan panyaldexer nu i Hristo evandilyon, ve pantave quetilde i carilde, ar antalde lérave tien and illin. 14 Hyamilte len ar milyar le, castanen i lahtala Erulisseo ya samilde. 15 Hantale Erun annaryan quettar pella!

11 In everything you are made rich, allowing you to give freely in every manner, and so God will receive thanksgiving by means of you. 12 For this ministry is not done solely to fill the needs of the holy ones, but it also causes an abundance of thanksgiving to God. 13 This ministry shows your faithfulness when you are tested. Therefore you give glory to God, since you subject yourselves  [lit. put yourselves under] the gospel of Christ, as you openly say that you do, and you give freely to them and to all. 14 They pray for you and long for you, by reason of the surpassing grace that you have. 15 Thanks to God for his gift beyond words!

RANTA 10
Mí Hristo quilda ar moica lé inye, Paulo, ique lello – inye ye ná "caurea" íre cenin le cendelello cendelenna, mal "canya" lenna íre uan tasse aselde. 2 É iquin lello i íre tuluvan ua mauyuva nin lenga mí canya lé ya apacenin, innar sanar i vantalme i hrávenen. 

CHAPTER 10
In the quiet and gentle manner of Christ I, Paul, beg of you – I who am "timid" when I see you face to face, but "bold" towards you when I am not there with you. 2 Indeed I beg of you that when I shall come it will not be necessary for me to behave in the bold manner that I foresee, against [those] who think that we walk by the flesh.

3 An ómu vantalme i hrávesse, ualme ohtacare i hrávenen. 4 An ohtacarielmo carmar uar hráveva, mal nalte túrie Erunen nuquerien artar. 5 Nuquerilme sanweataqui ar ilya varanda nat ya ná ortaina i istyanna Eruo, ar panyalme ilya sanwe mandosse tyarien sa himya i Hristo canwar. 6 Ar nauvalme manwe paimetien ilya carda ya ua *canwacimya, apa elde anaier cárine aqua *canwacimye.
	7 Yétalde nati ilceltanen. Qui aiquen ná tanca i náse i Hristova, nai enyaluvas i tambe sé i Hristova ná, síve yando elme nar. 8 An yando qui laitanyexe acca ole pa i túre ya i Heru antane men –   carastien le ama ar lá narcien le undu – uan nauva nucumna. 9 Uan mere náve tuntaina ve névala ruhta le mentanyainen.

3 For though we walk in the flesh, we do not make war by the flesh. 4 For the weapons of our war-making are not of flesh, but they are mighty by God to overturn fortresses. 5 We overturn thought-constructions and every lofty thing that is raised against the knowledge of God, and we put every thought in gaol to cause it to adhere to the commands of the Christ. 6 For we shall be ready to punish every deed which is not obedient, after you have been made wholly obedient.
	7 You look at things by their appearance. If anyone is certain that he is of the Christ, may he recall that as he is of the Christ, so are also we. 8 For also [/even] if I praise myself too much concerning the power that the Lord gave to us – to build you up and not to tear you down – I shall not be humbled. 9 I do not wish to be perceived as trying to terrify you with my letters.

10 An, quetilte: "Mentaryar nar torye ar túrie, mal íre sé immo tule, náse milya, ar questarya *nattírima." 11 Nai taiti queni hanyuvar i tambe nalme mentalmassen íre nalme oa, síve nalme yando cardassen íre nalme aselde. 12 An ualme verya note imme imíca i quetir mai pa inte, hya sesta imme as té. Íre nalte véra lestalta, ar sestar inte as inte, ualte saile. 13 Mal elme uar laituvar imme han i lesta, mal i lestanen ya Eru apánie men: i arahtielme yando eldenna. 14 Ualme eménier acca hairave laitala imme, ve carumnelme qui ualme túle lenna. Mal é utúlielme lenna tálala i Hristo evandilyon.  15 Ualme mene han rénalmar laitiénen imme pa molie cárina lo exi, mal samilme i estel i íre savielda ale, yando elme nauvar cárine taure imíca le, i lestanen antaina men. Tá rahtuvalme en ambe hairave, 

10 For, say they: "His letters are strong and mighty, but when he himself comes, he is weak, and his speech despicable." 11 May such people understand that as we are in our letters when we are away, so we are also in deeds when we are with you. 12 For we do not dare to count ourselves among those that speak well of themselves, or compare ourselves with them. When they are their own measure, and compare themselves with themselves, they are not wise. 13 But we do not praise ourselves beyond the measure, but by the measure that God has put for us: that we have reached also [/even] to you. 14 We have not gone too far praising ourselves, as we were going to do if we did not [in fact] come to you. But indeed we have come to you bringing the gospel of the Christ. 15 We do not go beyond our borders by praising ourselves about work done by others, but we have the hope that when your faith grows, we as well will be made mighty among you, by the measure given us. Then we will reach still further, 

16 cárala i evandilyon sinwa i nóriessen han le. Sie uan laituva imne pa molie carna exeo ménasse, yasse nati nar manwaine nóvo. 17 "Mal ye laitaxe, nai laituvas inse i Hérusse." 18 An ye anta insen mára *vettie ua ye lahtuva i tyestiesse, mal sé yen i Héru anta mára *vettie.

16 making the gospel known in the countries beyond you. Thus I will not praise myself about work done in another's region, where things are prepared beforehand. 17 "But he that praises himself, may he praise himself in the Lord." 18 For [the one] that gives himself a good witness is not the one that will pass at the test, but he to whom the Lord gives good witness.

RANTA 11
Merin i lavumnelde pitya lesta alasailiéva nillo. Mal é lavilde sa nillo! 2 An şúlenya urya len valaina uriénen, an *ertanenye le as er veru, talienyan le i Hristonna ve poica vende. 3 Mal sí rucin ho i mi sina hya sana lé – ve i leuca şahtane Éve cururyanen – sámaldar nauvar hastaine ar talaine oa meliello i Hristo holmo ar poiciénen. 4 An lavilde sa mai qui quén tule ar quete pa hyana Hristo – lá i imya ye elme carner sinwa – hya ñetilde faire ya ua i imya ya eñétielde yá, hya evandilyon ya ua i imya ya acámielde.

CHAPTER 11
I wish that you will allow a small measure of unwisdom from me. But indeed you allow it from me! 2 For my spirit burns for you with a divine burning, for I united you with one husband, for me to lead you to the Christ as a pure virgin. 3 But now I fear that in this or that manner – like the serpent seduced Eve with its cunning – your minds will be marred and led away from loving the Christ sincerely and with purity. 4 For you well allow it if a person comes to you and speaks of another Christ – not the same that we made known – or you get a spirit which is not the same that you got formerly, or a gospel which is not the same that you have received.

5 An namin i muntasse loitan i antare aposteli. 6 Yando qui nanye úfinya pa quettar, uan sie pa istya, mal mi ilya lé atánielme ta len. 7 Lau carnen úcare íre carnenyexe nalda ortien lé, pan úpaityana carnen Eruo evandilyon sinwa? 8 Hyane ocombellon "pílen", cámala tulco tello carien núromolie elden. 9 Ar íre engen aselde ar sáme maure, únen cóla aiquenen, an maurenyar náner quátine lo i hánor i túler Maceroniallo. Mi ilya lé hempenyexe ar hepuvanyexe návello cólo len. 10 Ve Hristo nanwie ea nisse, uan nauva pustaina sie laitiello imne Maceronio ocombessen. 11 Ar manen sie? Pan uan mele le? Eru ista i carin!

5 For I judge that in nothing I fall short of the most lofty apostles. 6 Also if I am unskilled concerning words, I am not so concerning knowledge, but in every manner I have showed that to you. 7 Surely I did not do [or, commit] a sin when I maked myself lowly in order to elevate you, since unpaid I made God's gospel known? 8 From other congrations I "stole", receiving support from them to do ministry for you. 9 For when I was with you and had need, I was not a burden for anyone, for my needs were filled by the brothers that came from Macedonia. In every manner I kept myself and shall I keep myself from being a burden to you. 10 As the truth of Christ exists in me, I shall not be stopped from so praising myself in the congrations of Macedonia. 11 And how so? Since I do not love you? God knows that I do!
	
12 Ar ya cáran yando caruvan, lá antien ecie in merir ecie, náveltan hírine vávie aselme mi ta pa ya laitaltexer.  13 An taiti neri nar úanwe aposteli, húrala *mólindor, vistala inte mir Hristo aposteli. 14 Ar ta ua elmenda, an Sátan immo vistaxe mir vala calava. 15 Etta ua túra nat qui núroryar vistar inte mir núror failiéno. Mal mettalta nauva ta ya hilya cardaltallon.

12 And what I am doing I shall also do, not to give an opportunity to those that desire an opportuniy, for them to be found equal with us in that of which they praise themselves. 13 For such men are false [lit. unreal] apostles, lying workers, changing themselves into Christ's apostles. 14 And that is not a wonder, for Satan himself changes himself into an angel of light. 15 Therefore it is not a great thing if his servants change themselves into servants of righteousness. But their end shall be that which follows from their deeds.

	16 Quetin ata: Lava *úquenen sana i nanye auco! Mal qui é sanalde sie, cama ni yando ve qui nanye auco, lávala yando nin laita imne pitya lestasse! 17 Ya quetin uan quete i Herullo, mal ve lénen auco, íre laitanyexe ta tancave!  18 Pan rimbali laitar inte i hrávenen, yando inye laituvaxe! 19 An mi alasse lavilde aucoin care natiltar – elde i nar ta saile! 20 Lavilde sa íre quén care le móli, hya ammate ya samilde, hya mapa armaldar, hya ortaxe or elde, hya pete le i cendelenna! 21 Nanye nucumna quétala i elme anaier acca milye carien ta!

	16 I say again: Let nobody think that I am a fool! But if you indeed think so, receive me also as if I am a fool, allowing me as well to praise myself in a small measure! 17 What I say I do not say from the Lord, but like in [-nen] the manner of a fool, when I praise myself so surely! 18 Since numerous ones praise themselves by the flesh, I as well will praise myself! 19 For with joy you allow fools to do their things – you who are so wise! 20 You allow it when a person makes you thralls, or devours what you have, or seizes your goods, or raises himself above you, or strikes you to the face! 21 I am humbled saying that we have been too weak to do that!

	Mal ilqua pa ya aiquen verya laita inse – quétan ve auco – yando inye verya laita inse pa ta!  22 Ma nalte Heveryar? Yando inye ná! Ma nalte Avrahámo erde? Yando inye ná! 23 Mal nalte Hristo núror? Quetin ve qui nanye ettesse sámanyo: Inye ná sie en ambe! Omótien ambe, anaien mandosse ambe rimbave, acámien ambe rimbe petiéli, anaien hare qualmenna rimbave. 24 Mi lúr lempe acámien Yúrallon petier *canaquean hequa er. 25 Nel anaien palpaina vandillínen; lú er anaien *saryaina. Nel i cirya yasse anen lende undu; ter lóme yo aure anaien i núre nenissen, 26 rimbe lendalissen, raxesse sírellon, raxesse pilullon, raxesse véra lienyallo, raxesse i hyane nórellon, raxesse mí osto, raxesse mí ravanda, raxesse earesse, raxesse úanwe hánollon, 27 mi mótie ar urdie, rimbave ú húmeo, maitiesse ar soiciesse, rimbave pénala matso, nála ringa ar ú lannion. 28 Ar napánina i natin i ettesse ea yando i ilaurea nirie ninna, i quárele ilye i ocombin. 29 Mal ná milya, ar inye ua milya? Man ná tyarna lanta ar inye ua urya? 

	But everyting of which anyone dares to praise himself – I am speaking as a fool – I as well dares to praise myself of himself! 22 Are they Hebrews? I as well am! Are they Abraham's seed? I as well am! 23 Are they Christ's servants? I speak as if I am out of my mind: I am so still more! I have toiled more, I have been in prison more frequently, I have received more numerous blows, I have been near to death frequently. 24 On five occasions I have received from Jews forty blows except one. 25 Thrice I have been beaten with rods; one time I have been stoned. Thrice the ship on which I was went down; for a night and a day I have been in the deep waters, 26 on numerous journeys, in danger from rivers, in danger from robbers, in danger from my own people, in danger from the other nations, in danger in the city, in danger in the wilderness, in danger at sea, in danger from false brothers, 27 in toiling and difficulty, frequently without sleep, in hunger and thirst, frequently lacking food, being cold and without clothes. 28 And added to the things on the outside [there] is also the daily pressure upon me, the anxiety for all the congregations. 29 Who is weak, and I am not weak? Who is caused to fall and I do not burn?

	30 Qui mauya i laituvanyexe, laituvanyexe pa i nati yassen nanye milya. 31 Yésus Hristo Herulvo Aino ar Atar, é ye nauva laitana tennoio, ista i uan húra. 32 Lamascusse i nóretur nu aran Aretas tirne i Lamascearon osto ni-mapien, 3 mal ter assa i rambasse anen mentaina undu colcasse ar úşe et máryalto.

	30 If it is necessary that I shall praise myself, I will praise myself concerning the things in which I am weak. 31 The God and Father of Jesus Christ our Lord, indeed [he] who shall be blessed forever, knows that I am not lying. 32 In Damascus the governor under king Aretas watched the city of the Damascenes to seize me, 3 but through a hole in the wall I was sent down in a box and escaped out of his hands.   

RANTA 12
Mauya nin laita imne. Uas aşea, mal sí tuluvan ceniennar ar apantiennar i Heruva. 2 Istan nér mi Hristo ye loar canaque yá – i hroasse hya ettesse i hravo uan ista, Eru ista – náne mapaina oa i nelya menelenna. 3 É istan taite nér – i hroasse hya ettesse i hravo uan ista, Eru ista – 4 anes mapaina oa Erumanna ar hlasse avaquétime quettali, yar atan ua lerta quete.

CHAPTER 12
It is necessary for me to praise myself. It is not beneficial, but now I shall come to visions [lit. seeings/sightings] and revelations of the Lord. 2 I know a man in Christ who fourteen years ago – in the body or outside of the body I do not know, God knows – was taken away to the third heaven. 3 Indeed I know such a man – in the body or outside of the body I do not know, God knows – 4 he was taken away to paradise [Eruman, heaven] and heard unutterable words, which a man may not speak.

5 Pa taite nér laituvanyexe, mal lá pa inye, hequa pa milya sómanya. 6 An qui é merin laita imne, ta ua carumne ni auco, an quetumnen i nanwie. Mal laian, pustien aiquen saniello pa ni tárave lá ya cenis i nanye, hya hlaris nillo. 7 Pustien ni návello turquima i úvenen apantiéva acámien necel i hrávesse, Sátan vala, petieryan ni; sie uan nauva acca turquima. 8 Pa ta arcanen i Herullo nel i autumnes nillo, 9 mal i Heru quente ninna: "Lissenya farya lyen, an túrenya ná carna ilvana milya sómasse." Mi antúra alasse, etta, laituvanyexe pa milya sómanya, tyárala i Hristo túre caita ninna. 10 Etta nanye valima íre nanye milya, íre perperin orme, íre samin maure, íre nanye roitaina hya urdiessen, Hriston. An íre nanye milya, tá nanye torya.

5 Concerning such a man I will praise myself, but not concerning myself, except concerning my weak state. 6 For if I indeed want to praise myself, that was not going to make me a fool, for I would speak the truth. But I do not, to stop anyone from thinking about me more highly than [that] which he sees that I am, or he hears from me. 7 To stop me from being haughty by the abundance of revelation I have received a thorn in the flesh, an angel of Satan, for it to strike me; thus I will not be too haughty. 8 Concerning that I requested of the Lord thrice that it would go away from me, 9 but the Lord said to me: "My grace suffices for you, for my power is made perfect in a weak state." With [lit. "in"] greatest joy, therefore, I praise myself about my weak state, causing the Christ's power to lie upon me. 10 Therefore I am happy when I am weak, when I suffer violence, when I have need, when I am persecuted or in difficulties, for Christ. For when I am weak, then I am strong.

11 Anaien auco! Elde mauyaner nin náve sie, an rohtalda nin náne quete mai pa ni. An mi munta loitan i antare aposteli, ómu nanye munta. 12 Nanwa apostelo tanwar náner cárine mici le ilya cólenen, tanwalínen ar elmendalínen ar túrie cardar. 13 An mi mana anelde cárine pitye lá i hyane ocombi, hequa i inye úne cólo len? Ánin apsene úfailie sina!
	14 Yé, si ná i neldea lú yasse nanye manwa tulien lenna. Ar uan nauva cólo, an uan cesta ya samilde, mal cestan lé. An híni uar same rohta care haura ontarultant, mal ontaru hínaltain. 15 Ar mi alasse *yuhtuvan ya samin, ar nauvan *yuhtaina, fealdain. Qui melin le i ambe, ma nauvan mélina i mis? 16 Mal yando qui ta ná sie, inye úne cólo len – mal nála ruscuite cé nampen le fintalénen?

11 I have been a fool! You compelled me to be so, for what you owed me [rohtalda nin = your debt to me] was to speak well about me. For in nothing I fall short of the loftiest apostles, though I am nothing. 12 The signs of a true apostle was done among you with all patience, with signs and wonders and powerful deeds. 13 For in what were you made less than the other congrations, except that I was not a burden to you? Forgive me this injustice!
	14 Behold, this is the third occasion that I am ready to come to you. And I will not be a burden, for I do not seek what you have, but I seek you. For children do not have a debt [do not owe] to make store for their parents, but parents for their children. 15 And with joy I will use what I have, and will I be used, for your souls. If I love you the more, will I be loved the less? 16 But even if that is so, I was not a burden to you – but being foxy perhaps I seized you by a trick?

17 Lau carnen ñetie et lello aiquennen ye mentanen lenna? 18 Hortanen Títo ar mentane i háno óse.  Lau Títo oi carne ñetie et lello? Ma uamme vantane i imya fairesse, i imya tiesse?
	19 Ma ter quanda lúme sina asánielde i elden tarilme ama inwen? Erunna, i Hristosse, quetilme! Mal ilqua, meldanyar, ná carastien le ama. 20 An rucin ho i íre tuluvan, uan hiruva le ve polin mere, ar inye ua nauva len ve elde polir mere, mal i mende euvar mi sina hya sana lé costier, *hrúceni, rúşie felmi, costi, ulca quetie pa exi, hlustier, *valatie, rúcina sóma. 21 Cé, íre entuluvan, Ainonya nucumuva ni mici le, ar mauyuva nin same nyére pa rimbali i úcarner yá ar uar ihírie inwis pa i úpoicie ar i *hrupuhtie ar i lehta lengie yainen elengielte.

17 Surely I did not make profit [ñetie, 'getting', gain] out of you by anyone that I sent to you? 18 I urged Titus and sent the brother with with. Surely Titus did not make profit out of you? Did we [dual] not walk in the same spirit, in the same path?
	19 Did you for [ter = through] this whole time think that [it was] to you we stand up for ourselves? [It is] to God, in Christ, we speak! But everything, my beloved, is in order to build you up. 20 For I fear [Q: fear from] that when I shall come, I will not find you as I can wish, and I will not be to you like you can wish, but instead [there] will be in this or that manner quarrelings, envies, angry feelings, strifes, evil speaking about others, whisperings, pride, a disordered state. 21 Perhaps, when I shall return, my God will humiliate me among you, and it will be necessary for me to have grief concerning numerous ones that sinned formerly and have not found repentance concerning the uncleanness and the fornication and the loose conduct with which they have behaved.

RANTA 13
Si ná i nelya lú yasse túlan lenna. Astarmo atta hya neldeo antonen ilya natto nauva tulcaina. 2 Equétien yá, íre engen aselde apa túlen lenna mí attea lú, ar sí íre nanye oa quetin nóvo innar úacárier yá ar ilye i exennar: Qui oi nanwenuvan uan tanuva oravie, 3 pan cestalde tanwa tulcala i inyenen Hristo quete, sé ye ua milya lenna mal túrea mici lé. 4 É anes tarwestaina milya sómaryanen, mal náse coirea Eruo túrenen. Ar é elme nar milye óse, mal nauvalme coirie óse Eruo túrenen lenna.
	5 Á tyasta inde qui nalde i saviesse; na tance pa mana nalde. Hya ualde hepe sámasse i Yésus Hristo ea lesse? Qui ualde oloitie i tyastiesse. 6 Mal samin i estel i hanyuvalde i elme uar oloitie i tyastiesse.
	7 Hyamilme Erunna i caruvalde munta ulca, lá tanien i elme alahtier íre anelme tyestaine, mal carieldan márie, yando qui *şéyuva i elme oloitier.

CHAPTER 13
This is the third time that I am coming to you. By the mouth of two or three witnesses every matter will be established. 2 I have said formerly, when I was with you after I came to you for the second time, and now when I am away I say beforehand to those that have sinned formerly and to all the others: If I ever return I will not show mercy, 3 since you seek a sign establishing that by me Christ speaks, he who is not weak towards you but powerful among you. 4 Indeed he was crucified owing to [-nen] his weak state, but he is alive by God's power. And indeed we are weak with him, but we shall be alive with him by God's power towards you.
	5 Test yourselves if you are in the faith; be sure about what you are. Or do you not keep in mind that Jesus Christ exists in you? If you have not failed at the test. 6 But I have the hope that you will understand that we have not failed at the test.
	7 We pray to God that you will do nothing evil, not to show that we have passed when we were tested, but for you to do good, even if [it] will seem that we have failed.

8 An polilme care munta i nanwienna; polilme eryave manya i nanwie. 9 An nalme valime íre elme nar milye mal elde nar torye, an nat sinan hyámalme: i nauvalde cárine ilvane. 10 Etta técan nati sine íre nanye oa, pustien imne lengiello mi naraca lé íre euvan aselde, i túrenen ya i Heru antane nin – carastien ama ar lá narcien undu. 
	11 Teldave, hánor: Namárie! Na cárine ilvane, na tiutaine, na er sámo, mara rainesse; ar i Aino melmeva ar raineva euva aselde. 12 Á *suila quén i exe aire miquenen! 13 Ilye i airi *suilar le!
	14 Nai i Heru Yésus Hristo lisse ar Eruo melme ar masselda i Aire Feasse euvar as illi mici le!

8 For we can do nothing against the truth; we can solely help the truth. 9 For we are happy when we are weak but you are strong, for for this thing we pray: that you will be made perfect. 10 Therefore I am writing these things when I am away, to stop myself from behaving in a harsh manner when I shall be with you, by the power that the Lord gave me – to build up and not to tear down.
	11 Finally, brothers: Farewell! Be made perfect, be comforted, be of one mind, dwell in peace; and the God of love and of peace will be with you. 12 Greet one another with a holy kiss! 13 All the holy ones greet you!
	14 May the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ and God's love and your share in the Holy Spirit be with all among you!
