Apostelion Cardar 
Acts of the Apostles


RANTA 1 
Minya quentanya, alcarinqua Şeofílo, tencen pa ilye i nati yar Yésus *yestane care ar peanta, 2 tenna i aure yasse anes mapana ama, apa antanes canwar i apostelin i cildes. 3 Tien yú tannes inse coirea rimbe tanwalínen apa perpéres, nála cénaina lo té ter auri *canaquean, carila sinwe i nati yar apir Eruo aranie. 4 Ar omentieryassen aselte antanes tien i canwar: “Áva lelya oa Yerúsalemello, mal á lemya, hopila tan pa ya i Atar antane vandarya, ar pa ya hlasselde nillo. 5 An Yoháno sumbane nennen, mal elde nauvar sumbane Aire Feanen lá rimbe auri ho sí.”

CHAPTER 1
My first account, glorious Theophilus, I wrote about all the things that Jesus started to do and to teach, 2 until the day when he was taken up, after he gave commands to the apostles that he chose. 2 To them he also showed himself alive with many signs after he suffered, being seen by them through forty days, making known the things that concern God's kingdom. 4 And at his meetings with them he gave them the commands: “Do not go away from Jerusalem, but remain, waiting for that [ta-n] about which the Father gave his promise, and about which you heard from me. 5 For John baptized with water, but you will be baptized with Holy Spirit not many days from now.”

	6 Sí íre anelte ocómienwe, maquentelte senna: “Heru, ma envinyatal i aranie Israélen lúme sinasse?” 7 Quentes téna: “Ua elden ista i lúmi ar lúr yar i Atar apánie véra túreryasse, 8 mal camuvalde túre íre i Aire Fea tuluva lenna; ar nauvalde astarmonyar mi Yerúsalem ar i quanda Yúrea ar Samária véla, ar cemeno anhaira rantanna.”
	9 Ar apa quentes nati sine, lan tíranelte, anes ortaina, ar lumbo se-nurtane hendultalto. 10 Ar íre yentelte ama mir menel íre oantes, yé! nér atta mi ninqui larmar tarnet ara te, 11 ar quentette: “Neri Alileallo, manen ná i táralde yétala menel? Yésus sina, ye náne cámina ama lello mir i lumbo, entuluva sie, mí imya lé ya tirneldes lelyala mir menel.”

	Now when they were assembled, they asked him: “Lord, do you renew the kingdom for Israel at this time?” 7 He said to them: “It is not for you to know the times and moments which the Father has placed in his own power, 8 but you will receive power when the Holy Spirit shall come to you; and you will be my witnesses in Jerusalem and the entire Judea and Samaria alike, and to the farthest part of the earth.”
	9 And after he said these things, while they were watching, he was being lifted up, and a cloud hid him from their eyes [dual]. 10 And while they looked up into heaven when he went away, behold! two men in white garments stood by them, 11 and they [dual] said: “Men from Galilee, how is [it] that you are standing looking at heaven? This Jesus, who was taken up from you into the cloud, shall return so, in the same manner that you watched him go into heaven.”

	12 Tá nanwennelte mir Yerúsalem i orontello estaina Oron *Milloaldaron, ya hare ná  Yerúsalemenna, *os *sendarelenda oa. 13 Tá, meniéla minna, lendelte ama mir i oromar yasse marnelte, Péter ar Yoháno ar Yácov ar Andréo, Filip ar Şomas ar Mattéo, Yácov Alféoion ar Símon i Sélot, ar Yúras Yácovion. 14 Illi mici te náner voronde hyamiesse, as nisseli ar María amil Yésuo, ar as hánoryar.

	Then they went back into Jerusalem from the mountain called Mount of Olives, which is near to Jerusalem, around a sabbath's journey away. 13 Then, after going inside, they went up into the upper hall where they dwelt, Peter and John and Jacob and Andrew, Philip and Thomas and Matthew, Jacob son of Alphaeus and Simon the Zelot, and Judas son of Jacob. 14 All among them were steadfast in prayer, with some women and Mary mother of Jesus, and with his brothers.

	15 Sí yane auressen Péter oronte et endello i hánoron – i şánga náne *os queni *yúquean tuxa – ar quente: 16 “Neri, hánor, mauyane i Tehtelen náve carna anwa, ta ya i Aire Fea quente nóvo ter Láviro anto pa Yúras, ye tanne i tie in namper Yésus. 17 An anes nótina mici vi ar camne ranta núromolie sinasse.” 18 (Nér sina ñente resta i *paityalénen úfailiéno, ar lantala hatsenen rúves i endesse, ar ilye hirdiryar uller et sello. 19 Ta olle sinwa illin i marner Yerúsalemesse, ar etta sana resta náne estaina lambeltasse Aceldama, ya tea: Resta Serceva.)

	15 Now in those days Peter arose out of the middle of the brothers – the crowd was around hundred and twenty persons – and said: “Men, brothers, it was necessary for the Scripture to be made true, that which the Holy Spirit spoke beforehand through David's mouth about Judas, who showed the way for those that seized Jesus. 17 For he was counted among us and received a part in this ministry.” 18 (This man got a field for the reward of unrighteousness, and falling with a headlong movement he burst in the middle, and all his entrails poured out of him. 19 That became known to all that dwelt in Jerusalem, and therefore that field was called in their tongue Aceldama, which means: Field of Blood.)

 20 “An anaie técina i Parmasse Airelírion: 'Nai mardarya nauva lusta, ar nai *úquen maruva tasse', ar: 'Nómerya ortíriéno lava exen mapa.'  21 Etta mauya ven cile er i nerion i túler uo aselve ter i quanda lúme yasse i Heru Yésus lende minna ar ettenna mici vi, 22 i yestallo íre Yoháno sumbeáne ar tenna i aure yasse anes cámina ama vello. Quenen mici té mauya náve astarmo aselve pa enortierya.”
	23 Ar tulyanelte ompa atta, Yósef estaina Varsappas, ye sáme i epesse Yusto, ar Mattías. 24 Ar hyamnelte ar quenter: “Elye, Héru ye ista illion endar, cara sinwa man icíliel 25 camien i núromolie ar nóme ve apostel yar Yúras hehtane menien véra nómeryanna.” 26 Ar hantelte *şanwali pa tu, ar i *şanwa tenge Mattías, ar anes nótina imíca i minque aposteli.

	20 “For [it] has been written in the Book of Psalms: 'May his home be empty, and may no one live there', and: 'His place of oversight let another take.' 21 Therefore it is necessary for us to choose one of the men that came together with us through[out] the entire time in which the Lord Jesus went in and out [ettenna, to outside] among us, 22 from the beginning when John was baptizing and until the day when he was received up from us. For a person among them it is necessary to be a witness with us about his resurrection.”
	23 And they led forward two, Joseph called Barsabbas, who had the nickname Justus, and Matthias. 24 And they prayed and said: “You, Lord who know the hearts of all, make known who you have chosen 25 to receive the ministry and place as apostle which Judas abandoned to go to his own place.” 26 And they threw lots about them, and the lot indicated Matthias, and he was counted among the eleven apostles.

RANTA 2 
Íre i aure aşaro Otsolaron Otso náne túlienwa, anelte illi uo mi er nóme, 2 ar rincinen túle menello ran ve hlápula naraca súrio, ar quantes i quanda coa yasse engelte. 3 Ar lambar ve etsátaina náreva nemner tien, ar hamunes ilquende mici te. 4 Tá illi mici te náner quátine Aire Feanen ar *yestaner quete *alavéle lambelissen, ve i Faire antane tien carpa.
	5 Ar enger Yerúsalemesse Yúrali marila tasse, *ainocimye neri, ilya nórello nu menel. 6 Sie, íre ran sina martane, i liyúme ocomne ar náne rucina, an ilquen mici te hlasse te quéta véra lamberyasse. 7 Anelte captaine ar mi elmenda, quetila: “Yé, ilye queni sine i quétar nar Alileallo, lá? 

CHAPTER 2 
When the day of the festival of Seven Weeks was come, they were all together in one place, 2 and suddenly [rincinen, lit. 'with a sudden move'] [there] came from heaven a noice as of a blowing violent wind, and they filled the entire house in which they were. 3 And tongues as of fire being distributed appeared to them, and it settled [lit. sat down] on everyone among them. 4 Then all among them were filled with Holy Spirit and began to speak in various tongues, as the Spirit gave to them to talk.
	5 And [there] were in Jerusalem Jews dwelling there, pious men, from every country under heaven. 6 Thus, when this noise occurred, the host assembled and was confused, for everyone aming them heard them speak in his own tongue. 7 They were startled and in wonder, saying: “Behold, all these people that are speaking are from Galilee, no?

8 Ananta manen ná i hláralve, ilquen mici vi, véra lamberya yassen anelve nóne? 9 Queni ho Parşea ar Meria ar Elam, queni i marir mi Mesopotamia, Yúrea ar Capaprocia, Pontus ar Ásia, 10 ar Frihia ar Pamfylia, Mirrandor ar i ménar Livio, hare Cirénenna, ar i utúlier Rómallo, Yúrar ar quérinar véla, 11 queni ho Hréte ar Aravia – hláralvet quéta vére lambelvassen pa Eruo túre cardar!” 12 Anelte ara inte elmendanen ar hanyaner munta, quetila quén i exenna: “Mana ná nat sina?” 13 Mal exeli, yaiwesse téna, quenter: “Nalte quante lisse limpeo!”

8 And yet how is [it] that we are hearing, everyone among us, his own tongue that we are born in? 9 People from Parthea ar Media and Elam, people that dwell in Mesopotamia, Judea and Capadocia, Pontus and Asia, 10 and Phrygia and Pamphylia, Egypt and the regions of Libya, near to Cyrene, and [those] that have come from Rome, Jews and converted ones alike, 10 people from Crete and Arabia – we are hearing them speak in our own tongues about God's great deeds!” 12 They were beside themselves with wonder and understood nothing, saying one to the other: “What is this thing?” 13 But others, in mockery against them, said: “They are full of sweet wine!”

	14 Mal Péter oronte as i minque ar ortane ómarya ar quente téna: “Neri Yúreallo ar ilye elde i marir Yerúsalemesse, nai si nauva sinwa len, ar á lasta quetienyannar: 15 Queni sine é uar quante limpeo ve intyalde, an si i neldea lúme i aureo ná. 16 Úsie, si ná ya náne quétina ter Yoel i Erutercáno: 17 'Ar i métime auressen,' Eru quete, 'ulyauvan fairenyo ilya hrávenna, ar yondoldar ar yeldeldar quetuvar ve Erutercánor, ar nesse nerildar cenuvar mauri, ar yáre nerildain óluva olollínen, 18 ar yú hanwe ar inye mólinyannar ulyauvan fairenyo ente auressen, ar quetuvalte ve Erutercánor. 19 Ar antauvan tanwali menelde or le ar tannali cemende nún, serce ar náre ar híşie usqueva; 20 Anar oluva mornie ar Işil oluva serce, nó i Héruo túra ar meletya aure tuluva. 21 Ar ilquen ye yale i Héruo essenen nauva rehtana.'

	But Peter arose with the twelve and raised his voice and said to them: “Men from Judea and all you that dwell in Jerusalem, may this be known to you, and listen to my sayings: 15 These men are not full of wine as you suppose, for this is the third hour of the day. 16 On the contrary, this is [that] which was spoken though Joel the Prophet: 17 'And in the last days,' God says, 'I will pour [some] of my spirit upon all flesh, and your sons and your daughters will speak like prophets, and your young men will see visions, and  your old men will dream dreams [lit. for your old men [it] will be dreamt with dreams], 18 and also upon my male and female thralls I shall pour [some] of my spirit in those days, and they will speak as prophets. 19 And I will give signs in heaven above you and portents on earth below, blood and fire and mist of smoke; 20 The Sun will become darkness and the Moon will become blood, before the Lord's great and mighty day shall come. 21 And everyone who calls upon [or 'by', -nen] the Lord's name will be saved.

	22 Neri Israélo, hlara quettar sine: Yésus Násaretello, nér ye Eru panyane epe le taure cardalínen ar tanwalínen ar tannalínen yar Eru carne sénen endeldasse, ve elde istar, 23 nér sina, ve quén antana olla, Eruo tanca panonen ar i istyanen ya sámes nóvo, tancelde tarwesse úşanyaron mánen ar nacanter se. 24 Mal Eru ortane se lehtiénen qualmeo núti, an úne cárima qualmen hepitas. 25 An Lávir quete pa sé: 'Illume cennen i Héru epe hendunyat, an náse ara formanya, ni-pustien návello pálina. 26 Etta endanya náne valima ar lambanya quente pa túra alasse. Ente, yú hrávenya maruva estelde, 27 an ual hehtuva feanya Mandostosse; yú ual lavuva vorondalyan cene quelexima sóma. 28 Acáriel sinwe nin i tier coiviéva; ni-quantuval alassenen cendelelyallo.'

	22 Men of Israel, hear these words: Jesus from Nazareth, a man that God put before you with mighty deeds and signs and portents which God did by him in your midst, as you know, 23 this man, as a person given over, by God's firm plan and the knowledge that he had beforehand, you fastened on a cross by the hand of lawless ones and killed him. 24 But God raised him by loosening the bonds of death, for it was not possible for death to keep him. 25 For David says concerning him: 'I always saw the Lord before my eyes, for he is by my right hand, to stop me from being shaken. 26 Therefore my heart was glad and my tongue spoke about great joy. Furthermore, also my flesh will dwell in hope, 27 for you will not abandon my soul in Mandos [/Hades], also you will not allow your faithful one to see a corrupt state. 28 You have made known to me the paths of life; you will fill me with joy from your face.'

	29 Neri, hánor, nin ná lávina quete lérave lenna pa i *atartur Lávir, i effirnes ar náne talana sapsaryanna, ar noirirya ea mici vi tenna aure sina. 30 Etta, pan anes Erutercáno ar sinte i Eru antane sen vanda pa panie mahalmaryasse quén yáveo oşweryo, 31 sámes apacen ar quente pa i  enortave i Hristova, in únes hehtana Mandostosse; ente, hráverya ua cenne quelexima sóma. 32 Yésus sina Eru enortane, pa ya illi mici me nar astarmor. 33 Etta, pan anes ortana Eruo formanna ar camne i Aire Fea Ataryallo i vandanen ya hé náne ániéla, et-ulyanes si ya cénalde ar hláralde. 34 An Lávir ua oronte menelenna, mal isse immo quete: 'I Héru quente herunyanna: Hara ara formanya, 35 tenna panyuvan ñottotyar ve tulco talutyant.' 36 Etta nai i quanda nosse Israélo istuva in Eru carne se Heru ar Hristo, Yésus sina ye tarwestanelde.”

	29 Men, brothers, it is me allowed to speak freely to you about the patriarch David, that he expired and was brought to his grave, and his tomb is among us until this day. 30 Therefore, since he was a prophet and knew that God gave him a promise about placing on his throne a person of the fruit of his loins, 31 he had foresight and spoke about the resurrection of the Christ, that he was not abandoned in Mandos [= Hades]; furthermore, his flesh did not see a corrupt state. 32 This Jesus God resurrected, about which [fact] all among us are witnesses. 33 Therefore, since he was raised to God's right hand and received the Holy Spirit from his Father by the promise he [= the Father] had given, he poured forth this that you are seeing and you are hearing. 34 For David did not ascend to heaven, but he himself says: 'The Lord said to my lord: Sit by my right hand, 35 until I shall place your enemies as a support for your feet.' 36 Therefore may the entire kin of Israel know that God made him Lord and Christ, this Jesus that you crucified.”

	37 Íre hlasselte ta anelte círine endaltasse, ar quentelte Péterenna ar i hyane apostelinnar: “Neri, hánor, mana caruvalme?” 38 Péter quente téna: “Hira inwis, ar nai ilquen mici le nauva sumbana Yésus Hristo essenen apsenien úcarildaiva, ar camuvalde i anna Aire Feava. 39 An elden i vanda ná, ar hínaldain ar in nar haire – illi i yaluva i Heru Ainolva insenna.” 40 Ar rimbe hyane quettalínen *vettanes tien ar hortane te, quetila: “Á na rehtane quarca *nónare sinallo!” 41 Etta i camner quettarya náner sumbane, ar yana auresse *os fear húmi nelde náner napánine. 42 Ar anelte voronde mí peantáve i apostolion ar mí otornasse, i raciesse i massava ar i hyamiessen. 

	37 When they heard that they were cut in their heart, and they said to Peter and to the other apostles: “Men, brothers, what are we to do?” 38 Peter said to them: “Find repentance, and may everyone among you be baptized by the name of Jesus Christ for forgiveness of your sins, and you will receive the gift of Holy Spirit. 39 For for you is the promise, and for your children and for [those] that are far away – all that the Lord our God will call to himself.” 40 And with many other words he witnessed for them and urged them, saying: “Be saved from this perverse generation!” 41 Therefore [those] that received his word were baptized, and on that day around three thousand souls were added. 42 And they were steadfast in the teaching of the apostles and the brotherhood, in the breaking of the bread and in the prayers. 

	43 Rucie lantane ilquenna, ar rimbe elmendali ar tanwali martaner ter i aposteli. 44 Illi i sáver náner uo samiesse ilqua *alasatya, 45 ar vancelte armaltar ar i restar yar haryanelte ar etsanter i telpe illin, aiqueno maurenen. 46 Ar aure apa aure anelte i cordasse, nála er sámo, ar rancelte massa i coassen, matila mattalta mi alasse ar arwe poica endo, 47 laitala Eru ar arwe i lisseo i quanda lieo, lan ilya auresse i Heru napánane tien i náner rehtane.

	43 Fear fell upon everyone, and numerous wonders and signs happened through the apostles. 44 All that believed were together in having everything common, 45 and they sold their goods and the fields that they possessed and distributed the money to all, by anyone's need. 46 And 
day after day they were in the temple, being of one mind, and they broke bread in the houses, eating their food in joy and having a pure heart, 47 praising God and having the grace [or, good will] of the entire people, while every day the Lord was adding to them [those] that were saved.

RANTA 3 
Sí Peter ar Yoháno lender ama mir i corda i lúmesse hyamiéno, i nertea lúme. 2 Ar nér ye náne *úlévima amilleryo súmallo náne cólaina tar, ar panyaneltes ilya auresse ara i ando i cordo ya náne estaina i Mairea, arcieryan annar oraviéva ho i ménaner mir i corda. 

CHAPTER 3
Now Peter and John went up into the temple at the hour of prayer, the ninth hour. 2 And a man who was lame from his mother's womb was being carried thither, and they put him every day beside the gate of the temple that was called the Beautiful, for him to ask gifts of mercy from those that were going into the temple.

3 Íre cennes Péter ar Yoháno lelyea i cordanna, arcanes tullo annar oraviéva. 4 Mal Péter, as Yoháno, yente senna ar quente: “Ámet yéta!” 5 Etta tances henduryat tusse, sanila i camuvas nat tullo. 6 Mal Péter quente: “Telpe ar malta uan harya, mal ya é samin antan lyen: Essenen Yésus Hristo Nasaretello, á vanta!” 7 Ar nampeses formaryasse ar ortane se. Mí imya lú talluniryat ar i oxor imbi tál ar telco oller tulce, 8 ar campes ama ar vantane, ar lendes asette mir i corda, vantala ar capila ar laitala Eru. 9 Ar i quanda lie cenne se vantala ar laitala Eru. 10 Ente, sintelte man anes, in isse náne i nér ye nóvo hamme camien annar oraviéva ara i Mairea Ando i cordasse, ar anelte quátine elmendanen ar náner ara inte yanen náne martiéla sen.

3 When he saw Peter and John going towards the temple, he asked from them gifts of mercy. 4 But Peter, with John, looked at him and said: “Look at us!” 5 Therefore he fixed his eyes on them, thinking that he was going to [Q: will] receive something from them. 6 But Peter said: “Silver and gold I do not possess, but what I do have I give to you: By the name of Jesus Christ from Nazareth, walk!” 7 And he seized him in his right hand and raised him up. In the same moment his soles [dual] and the joints between foot and leg became firm, 8 and he jumped up and walked, and he went with them into the temple, walking and jumping and praising God. 9 And the entire people saw him walking and praising God. 10 Furthermore, they knew who he was, that he was the man who beforehand sat to receive gifts of mercy by the Fair Gate in the temple, and they were filled with wonder and were beside themselves by [that] which had happened to him.

11 Íre i nér himyane Péter ar Yoháno, i quanda lie, nála captaine, norner uo téna i nómesse estaina i Tarmatéma Solomondo. 12 Cenila ta, Péter quente i lienna: “Neri Israélo, manen ná i nalde elmendasse pa si, ar mana castalda yétien met ve qui véra melehtemmanen hya *ainocimiemmanen atyáriemmes vanta? 13 I Aino Avrahámo ar Ísaco ar Yácovo, atarelvaron Aino, acárie Yésus núrorya alcarinqua, sé ye elde antaner olla ar laquente epe Piláto cendele, ómu hé merne lerya se. 14 Elde laquenter i aire ar faila, ar arcanelde i camumnelde nér ye náne nahtar, 15 mal nacantelde i Turco coiviéva. Mal Eru ortane se qualinallon, pa ya illi mici me nar astarmor. 16 Etta, saviemmanen esseryasse, esserya acárie nér sina polda, sé ye yétalde ar ye istalde, ar i savie ya ea ter se ánie sen mále epe henduldat.

11 When the man stuck to Peter and John, the entire people, being startled, ran together to them in the place called the Columnade of Solomon.  12 Seeing that, Peter said to the people: “Men of Israel, how is [it] that you are in wonder about this, and what is your reason for looking at us as if by our own power or by our godliness we have caused him to walk? 13 The God of Abraham and Isaac and Jacob, the God of our fathers, has made Jesus his servant glorious, him that you gave over and denied before the face of Pilate, though he wanted to free him. 14 You denied the holy and just [one], and you requested that you were to receive a man who was a murderer, 15 but you killed the Chief of life. But God raised him from [the] dead, of which all among us are witnesses. 16 Therefore, by our faith in his name, his name has made this man strong, him whom you look at and whom you know, and the faith which is through him has given him health before your eyes. 

17 Ar sí, hánor, istan i carnelde sie peniesse istyava, ve turcoldar yú carner. 18 Mal sie Eru acárie nanwe i nati yar nóvo carnes sinwe ter ilye tercánoryaron anto: i Hristorya perperumne.
	19 Etta hira inwis ar quera inde! Tá úcareldar nauvar *aupsárine, lavila lúmin ceutiéva tule i Héruo cendelello. 20 Sie mentauvas i Hristo sátina len, Yésus, 21 ye mauya menelen hepe tenna i lúmi envinyatáveva ilye nativa, pa yar Eru quente antonen airi tercánoryaron, yalúmesse. 22 É Móses quente: “I Héru Ainolda ortauva Erutercáno mici hánoldar, ve ní.

17 And now, brothers, I know that you did so in lack of knowledge, as your rulers also did. 18 But thus God has made true the things that beforehand he made known through the mouth of all his heralds [= prophets]: that his Christ was going to suffer.
	19 Therefore find repentence and turn yourselves [around]! Then your sins will be wiped away, allowing times of refreshment to come from the face of the Lord. 20 Thus he will send the Christ appointed to you, Jesus, 21 whom it is necessary for heaven to keep until the times of renewal of all things, of which God spoke by the mouth of his holy heralds [/prophets], of old. 22 Indeed Moses said: “The Lord your God will raise [up] among your brothers, like me.

23 É ilya quen ye ua lasta sana Erutercáno nauva nancarna lieryallo.” 24 Ar ilye i Erutercánor, ho Samuel innar hilyaner se –  illi i equétier – yú acárier sinwe auri sine. 25 Elde nar yondor i Erutercánoron ar i véreo ya Eru tulcane as atarildar, quetila Avrahamenna: 'Ar erdelyasse ilye i nossi cemeno nauvar aistane.' 26 Apa Eru ortane Yondorya, eldenna minyave se-mentanes aistien le, queriénen ilquen oa olce cardaldallon.”

23 Indeed every person who does to listen to that prophet will be destroyed from his people.” 24 And all the prophets, from Samuel to those that followed him – all that have spoken – have also made known these days. 25 You are sons of the prophets and of the covenant that God established with your fathers, saying to Abraham: 'And in your seed all the families of earth will be blessed.' 26 After God raised his Son, to you he first sent him to bless you, by turning everyone away from your wicked deeds.”

RANTA 4 
Íre carampette i lienna, i hére *airimor ar i cordo hesto ar i Sanducear túler túna, 2 nála rúşie pan peantette i lien ar carnet sinwe i *enortale qualinallon Yésunen. 3 Ar panyanelte máltat tusse ar panyaner tu mandosse tenna i hilyala aure, an şinye náne tulinwa. 4 Mal rimbali imíca i hlasser i quetta sáver. Ar i nóte i nerion oronte tenna húmi lempe.
	5 Túle i hilyala auresse i ocomner i turi ar i amyárar ar i parmangolmor Yerúsalemesse, 6 as Annas i héra *airimo ar Caiafas ar Yoháno ar Alexander ar illi i náner i nosseo i héra *airimo. 7 Apa panie tu endaltasse maquentelte: “Mana túrenen hya mano essenen carneste nat sina?” 8 Tá Péter, quanta Aire Feo, quente téna: “Turcor i lieo ar amyárar, 9 qui namme aure sinasse céşaine pa mára carda nimpa neren, ar merilde ista mannen nér sina acámie málerya, 10 nai nauva sinwa illin mici le ar i quanda lien Israélo i sá martane i essenen Yésus Hristo Nasaretello, ye elde tarwestaner mal Eru ortane et qualinaillon. Issenen nér sina tára sisse epe le málesse.

CHAPTER 4
While they [dual] talked to the people, the chief priests and the captain of the temple and the Sadducees came to them, 2 being angry since they instructed the people and made know the resurrection from the dead by Jesus. 3 And they [plural] put their hands on them [dual] and put them in gaol until the following day, for evening had come.
	4 But numerous ones among [those] that heard the word believed. And the number of the men rose as far [or, high] as five thousands.
	5 It happened [lit. came] on the following day that the rulers and the elders and the scribes in Jerusalem assembled, 6 with Annas the chief priest and Caiaphas and John and Alexander and all that were of the kin of the chief priest. 7 After putting them in their midst they asked: “By what power and by whose name did you [dual] do this thing?” 8 Then Peter, full of Holy Spirit, said to them: “Rulers of the people and elders, 9 if we [dual exclusive] are on this day investigated about a good deed to an ailing man, and you want to know by whom this man has received his health, 10 may it be known to all among you and to the entire people of Israel that it happened by the name of Jesus Christ from Nazareth, whom you crucified but God raised out of [the] dead. By him this man is standing here before you in health. 

11 Si ná i ondo ya náne nótina ve munta lo elde i carastaner, ya olólie i vinco cas. 12 Ar rehtie ua ea aiquen hyananen, an yú ua antana hyana esse nu menel yanen mauya ven náve rehtane.”
	13 Íre cennelte manen lérave Péter ar Yoháno quenter, ar sinter i anette *tengwalóre ar senwe neri, anelte quátine elmendanen, pan yú sinteltet ve queni i náner as Yésus. 14 Íre cennelte i nér ye tarne asette, sé ye camne mále, sámelte munta quetien ana tu. 15 Etta, apa canie tun lelya et i ocombello, carnelte úvie uo, 16 quetila: “Mana caruvalve sine nerin? An tanwa ya queni istar amartie ter tu, aşcénima illin i marir Yerúsalemesse, ar ua ece ven laquete sa. 17 Mal pustien sa návello vintana ambe palan i liesse, alve naitya tu, in ávatte quetuva ambe esse sinanen aiquenna.”

11 This is the rock which was counted as nothing by you that built, which has been made the head of the corner. 12 For [there] is no salvation by anyone else, for also there is not [/neither is there] given [any] other name by which it is necessary for us to be saved.” 
	13 When they saw how freely Peter and John spoke, and knew that they [dual] were unlettered and ordinary men, they were filled with wonder, since they also knew them as people that were with Jesus. 14 When they [pl.] saw the man that stood with them [dual], he who received health, they [pl.] had nothing to say against them [dual]. 15 Therefore, after commanding them to go out from the council, they made a consideration together, 16 saying: “What are we to do to these men? For a sign which people know [about] has happened through them, easy to see to all that dwell in Jerusalem, and it is not possible for us to deny it. 17 But to stop it from being spread more widely in the people, let us rebuke them [dual], that they are not to speak more by this name to anyone.”

18 Ar apa yalie tu cannelte tun i mauyane tun aqua pusta quete ar peanta Yésuo essenen. 19 Mal hanquentasse Péter quente téna: “Qui faila ná Eruo hendusse lasta lenna ar lá Erunna, alde name inden! 20 Mal emme uat pole pusta quete pa yar ecéniemme ar ahláriemme.” 21 Apa ambe quentelte túna aice quettalínen lehtaneltet, pan ualte hirne casta paimetien tu, ar castanen i lieo, an illi mici te antaner alcar Erun pa ya martiéla né. 22 An i nér yesse tanwa sina nestiéva náne martienwa sáme amba lá loar *canaquean.
	
18 And after calling them they commanded them that it was necessary for them to completely cease to speak and teach by the name of Jesus. 19 But in answer Peter said to them: “If [/whether] it is just in God's eyes to listen to you and not to God, you judge for yourselves! 20 But we [dual] cannot cease to speak about [the things] that we have seen and we have heard.” 21 After they [pl.] spoke more to them [dual] with sharp words they released them, since they [pl.] did not find a reason for punishing them [dual], and by reason of the people, for all among them gave glory to God about [that] which had happened. 22 For the man on which this sign of healing had happened had [an age of] more than forty years. 

23 Apa anette lehtane lendette vérattannar ar nyarner tien i nati yar i hére *airimor ar i amyárar náner quétiléla túna. 24 Hlarila ta, er sámanen ortanelte ómalta Erunna ar quenter: “Hér, elye ná ye carne menel cemenye ar yar ear tusse, 25 ar ye Aire Feanen quente ter i anto Lávir atarelmo, núrolya: 'Manen ná i liendeli amortar ar lieli sánar pa luste natali? 26 Cemeno arani atárier ar i cánor ócómier ve er, i Hérunna ar Hristoryanna.' 27 An é ocomnelte osto sinasse, Herol ar Pontio Piláto ar ennoli i liendion, aire núrolyanna, Yésus, ye *elpanel, 28 carien yar mályanen ar cilmelyanen nóvo utulciel martumner.  29 Ar sí, Héru, á tunta *lurweltar, ar lava mólilyain quete quettalya ilya veriénen, 30 íre rahtal mályanen nestien, ar íre tanwali ar tannali martar essenen aire núrolyo, Yésus.

23 And after they [dual] were released they went to their [dual] own and told them about the things which the chief priests and elders had said to them [dual]. 24  Hearing that, with one mind they raised their voice to God and said: “Master, you are [the one] who made heaven and earth and [the things] that are exist in them [dual], 25 and who by Holy Spirit spoke through the mouth of David our father, your servant: 'How is [it] that nations rise up up and peoples are thinking about empty things? 26 The kings of earth have taken stand and the rulers have assembled as one, against the Lord and against his Christ.' 27 For indeed they assembled in this city, Herod and Pontius Pilate and people of the nations, against your holy servant, Jesus, whom you anointed, 28 to do [the things] that by your hand and by your choice you have beforehand established were going to happen. 29 And now, Lord, notice their threats, and allow your servants to speak your word with all boldness, 30 when you reach out with your hand to heal, and when signs and portents happen by the name of your holy servant, Jesus.

31 Ar apa quentelte i arcande, i nóme yasse anelte ócómienwe náne pálaina, ar ilquen mici te náne quátina i Aire Feanen ar quente Eruo quetta veriénen.
	32 Ente, i liyúme ion sáver sámer er enda ar fea, ar *úquen mici te quente pa *aiqua ya sámes i ta náne vérarya, mal haryanelte ilye nati uo. 33 Ar túra túrenen i aposteli et-antaner *vettielta pa i enortave Yésus Hristova, ar túra Erulisse caine illinnar mici te. 34 É enge *úquen arwa maureo mici te, an illi i sámer restar hya coar vancer tai ar talle i telpe ya ñentelte i vácine natin 35 ar panyaner ta epe i apostelion talu. Tá mo etsate ilquenen ve maurelta náne. 36 Sie Yósef, ye i apostellon camne i epesse Varsappa – ya tea Tiutaleo Yondo – quén i Leviron, nóna Ciprusse, 37 ye sáme resta, vance sa ar talle i telpe ar panyane sa epe i apostelion talu.

31 And after they said the request, the place where they were assembled was being shaken, and everyone among them was filled by the Holy Spirit and spoke God's word with boldness.
	32 Furthermore, the multitude of those that believed had one mind and spirit, and no one among them said about anything that he had that that was his own, but they possessed all things in common [uo: together]. 33 And with great power the apostles gave out their witness about the resurrection of Jesus Christ, and great grace lay upon all among them. 34 Indeed [there] was no one having need among them, for all that had fields or houses sold them and brought the money that they got for the sold things 35 and put that before the feet of the apostles. Then one distributed to everyone was their need was. 36 Thus Joseph, who from the apostles received the nickname Barsabba – which means Son of Comfort – one of the Levites, born at Cyprus, 37 who had a field, sold it and brought the money and put it before the feet of the apostles.

RANTA 5 
Mal nér yeo esse náne Ananías, as Saffíra verirya, vance resta ya sámes 2 ar nuldave hempe ranta i telpeo ya ñentes, ve yú verirya sinte. Talles rie ranta ar panyane sa epe i apostolion talu. 3 Mal Péter quente: “Ananías, manen ná i Sátan ánie lyen verie hurien i Aire Fean ar panya oa elyen ranta i telpeo ya ñentel i restan? 4 Lan haryanelyes, ma únes véralya? Ar apa anes vácina, ma ual en lertane cile mana carumnel? Mana castalya carien taite carda? Uhúriel, lá atanin, mal Erun!” 5 Íre hlasses quettar sine, Ananías lantane undu ar effirne. Ar túra rucie túle illinnar i hlasser sa. 6 Mal i nesse neri oronter, se-vaitaner lannelissen, ar coller se ettenna sapsaryanna.

CHAPTER 5
But a man whose name was Ananias, with Sapphira his wife, sold a field that he had 2 and secretly kept a part of the money that he got, as his wife also knew. He brought only a part and put it before the feet of the apostles. 3 But Peter said: “Ananias, how is [it] that Satan has given you boldness to lie to the Holy Spirit and put away for yourself a part of the money that you got for the field? 4 While you possessed it, was it not your own? And after it was sold, could you not still choose what you were going to do? What is your reason for doing such a deed? You have lied, not to men, but to God!” 5 When he heard these words, Ananias fell down and expired. And a great fear came upon all that heard it. 6 But the young men rose up, wrapped him in clothes, and carried him outside to his grave.

	7 Apa lúmi nelde verirya túle minna, lá istala ya martiéla né. 8 Péter quente senna: “Ánin nyare, ma vanceste i resta nonwe sinan?” Quentes: “Ná, ta náne i nonwe.” 9 Mal Péter quente senna: “Manen ná i aneste er sámo tyastien i Héruo faire? Yé! I talu ion taller verulya sapsaryanna nát epe i fenda, ar coluvalte lyé ettenna.” 10 Mí imya lú lantanes undu epe Pétero talu ar effirne. Íre i nesse neri túler minna, hirneltes qualina, ar colleltes ettenna ar antane sen sapsa ara verurya. 11 Etta túra rucie túle or i quanda ocombe ar or illi i hlasser pa nati sine.
	12 Ente, ter i apostolion mát rimbe tanwali ar tannali martaner imíca i lie, ar illi mici te ocomner Solomondo tarmatémasse, nála er sámo. 13 *Úquen i exion veryane *erta inse téna, ananta i lie laitane te. 

	7 After three hours his wife came inside, not knowing [that] which had happened. 8 Peter said to her: “Tell me, did you [dual] sell the field for this sum?” She said: “Yes, that was the sum.” 9 But Peter said to her: “How is [it] that you [dual] were of one mind to test the Lord's spirit? Behold! The feet [dual] of [those] that brought your husband to his grave are [dual] before the door, and they [pl.] will carry you outside.” 10 In the same moment she fell down before Peter's feet [dual] and expired. Whent he young men came inside, they found her dead, and they carried her outside and gave her a grave beside her husband. 11 Therefore great fear came upon the entire congregation and upon all that heard about these things.
	12 Furthermore, through the hands [dual] of the apostles numerous signs and portents happened among the people, and all among them assembled in Solomon's columnade, being of one mind. 13 No one of the others dared to join himself to them, and yet the people praised them.

14 Ente, ennoli i sáver i Herusse náner napánine, liyúmeli nelliva ar nisseliva véla. 15 Etta tallelte i hlaiwar ettenna ar panyaner te tasse pitye caimalissen ar tulmalissen, merila rie i Péter, íre lahtanes, hatuva leo ennolinnar mici te. 16 Ar i liyúme i ostollon pelila Yerúsalem ocomne, colila hlaiwali ar i náner nwalyaine lo úpoice fairi, ar ilquen mici te náne nestana.
	17 Mal i héra *airimo ar i enger óse, i heren Sanducearon ya enge tá, oronter ar náner quátine *hrúcennen, 18 ar panyanelte mát i apostelinnar ar panyaner te i ostomandosse. 19 Mal i lómisse i Héruo vala pantane i mando andor, talle te ettenna ar quente:  20 “Á lelya, ar tarila i cordasse á quete i lienna ilye i quetier pa coivie sina!” 21 Apa hlasselte ta, lendelte árasse mir i corda ar peantaner.

14 Furthermore, persons that belived in the Lord were added, multitudes of men [ner-li > nelli] and women alike. 15 Therefore they brought the sick ones outside and put them there on small beds and on biers, wishing only that Peter, when he passed by, was going to [Q: will] cast shadow on some people among them. 16 And the multitude from the cities surrounding Jerusalem assembled, carrying sick ones and [those] that were being tormented by unclean spirits, and everyone among them was healed.
	17 But the chief priest and [those] that were with him, the order of the Sadducees that existed then, arose and were filled with envy, 18 and they laid hands [dual] upon the apostles and put them in the city gaol. 19 But in the night the Lord's angel opened the gates of the gaol, brought them outside and said: 20 “Go, and standing in the temple speak to the people all the sayings about this life!” 21 After they heard that, they went at dawn into the temple and taught.

	 Íre i héra *airimo ar i enger óse túler, comyanelte i Tára Combe ar i quanda ocombe amyáraron i yondoron Israélo, ar mentaneltet i mandonna talien te. 22 Mal íre i cánor túler tar, ualte hirne te i mandosse. Apa nanwenie nyarnelte: 23 “I mando hirnelme pahta ilya varnassenen, ar i cundor tarila ara i fendar, mal íre latyanelme i mando ualme hirne aiquen i mityasse.” 24 Íre i cordo hesto ar i héra *airimo véla hlasser quettar sine, anelte útance pa nati sine ar pa mana martumne sina nattonen. 25 Mal nér túle ar nyarne tien: “Yé! I neri i panyanelde i mandosse ear i cordasse, tarila ar peantala i lien!” 26 Tá i hesto lende oa as cánoryar ar taller te, mal pen orme, pan runcelte ho in i lie.nahtuvar te sarni¨nen.

	When the chief priest and [those] that were with him came, they assembled the High Council and the entire council of the sons of Israel, and they sent them to the gaol to bring them. 22 But when the officers came thither, they did not find them in the gaol. After returning they told: 23 “The gaol we found shut with all security, and the guards standing by the doors, but when we opened the gaol we did not find anyone on the inside.” 24 When the captain of the temple and the chief priest alike heard these words, they were uncertain about these things and about what was going to happen because of [-nen] this matter. 25 But a man came and told them: “Behold! The men that you put in the gaol are in the temple, standing and instructing the people!” 26 Then the captain went away with his officers and brought them, but without violence, since they feared [Q; feared from] that the peope would [Q; will] kill them with stones.

27 Talleltet ar panyaner te epe i Tára Combe. Ar i héra *airimo quente: “Antanelme len i canwa: Á pusta peanta esse sinasse! Ananta, yé! aquátielde Yerúsalem peantáveldanen, ar merilde tala ner sino serce menna!” 29 Hanquentasse Péter ar i hyane aposteli quenter: “Mauya men hilya Eruo canwar or tai atanion. 30 Atarilvaron Aino ortane Yésus, ye elde nacanter lingiénen se aldasse. 31 Eru ortane se formaryanna ve Turco ar *Rehto, antáven inwis Israélen, ar apsenie úcariva. 32 Ar elme nar astarmor pa nattor sine, ve ná i Aire Fea, ya Eru antane in lastar canwaryar.”
	33 Íre hlasselte ta, feldelte harne ar merner nahta te. 34 Mal enge nér ye oronte i Tára Combesse, Farisa yeo esse náne Amaliel, *şanyepeantar melda i quanda lien. Cannes: “Á tulya i neri i ettenna şinta lúmen.” 

27 They brought them and put them before the High Council. And the chief priest said: “We gave you the command: Cease to teach in this name! And yet, behold! you have filled Jerusalem with your teaching, and you want to bring this man's blood upon us!” 29 In answer Peter and the other apostles said: “It is necessary for us to follow God's commands over those of men. 30 The God of your fathers raised [up] Jesus, whom you killed by hanging him on a tree. 31 God raised him to his right hand as Chief and Saviour, in order to give repentance to Israel and forgiveness of sins. 32 And we are witnesses about these matters, as is the Holy Spirit, that God gave to [those] that listen to his commands.”
	33 When they heard that, they felt wounded and wished to kill them. 34 But [there] was a man who arose in the High Council, a Pharisee whose name was Gamaliel, a law-teacher dear to the entire people. He commanded: “Lead the men to the outside for a short time.”

35 Tá quentes téna: “Neri Israélo, cima inde pa ya merilde care sine nerin. 36 An nó auri sine Şeuras oronte, quetila i anes valdea, ar nóte nelliva, *os tuxar canta, lender óse. Mal anes 
nahtana, ar illi i cimner canwaryar náner vintane ar nancarne. 37 Apa sé Yúras Alileallo oronte, mí rí yassen i lie náne nótina, ar tunces oa ennoli apa inse. Ananta sana nér qualle, ar illi i cimner canwaryar náner vintane.  38 Ar ve nati tarir sí, quetin lenna: Lava sine nerin náve ar áva tarce te, an qui natto sina hya carie sina atanillon ná, nauvas nancarna, 39 mal qui Erullo nás, ualde poluva nancare te. Tira inde, i ualde nauva hírine mahtala Erunna!”

35 Then he said to them: “Men of Israel, give heed to yourselves concerning what you want to do to these men. 36 For before these days Theudas arose, saying that he was important, and a number of men, around four hundred, went with him. But he was slain, and all that heeded his commands were scattered and undone. 37 After him Judas from Galilee arose, in the days in which the people was counted, and he drew away some people after himself. And yet that man died, and all that heeded his commands were scattered. 38 And as things stand now, I say to you: Let these men be and do not trouble them, for if this matter or things doing is from men, it will be undone, 39 but if it is from God, you will not be able to undo them. Watch yourselves, that you will not be found fighting against God!”

40 Tá cimnelte ya quentes. Apa tultave i aposteli rípeltet ar canner tien: “Ava quete mi esse Yésuo!” Tá lávelte tien mene.
	41 Té, etta, oanter i Tára Combello mi alasse, pan anelte nótine valde perperien yaiwe i essen. 42 Ar ilya auresse, i cordasse ar i coassen, ualte pustane care sinwa i evandilyon pa Yésus Hristo.

40 Then they gave heed to what he said. After summoning the apostles they flayed them and commanded them: “Do not speak in the name of Jesus!” Then they allowed them to go.
	41 They, therefore, went away from the High Council in joy, since they were counted worthy to suffer mockery for the sake of the name. 42 And every day, in the temple and in the houses, they did not cease to make known the gospel about Jesus Christ.

RANTA 6 
Mal yane auressen, lan i nóte hildoron oronte, i Hellenyar náner nurrula i Heveryannar, pan *verulóraltar úner címine i ilaurea etsatiesse. 2 Etta i yunque yalder i hildoron liyúme intenna ar quenter: “Ua mára men hehta Eruo quetta etsatien matso i sarnossen. 3 Etta, hánor, á cesta mici inde neri otso i samir mára *vettie, quante faireo ar sailiéno, ar panyuvalmet topien maure sina, 4 mal elme en antauvar imme i hyamien ar i núromolien i Quetto.”

CHAPTER 6
But in those days, while the number of disciples rose, the Hellenists were grumbling against the Hebrews, since their widows were not heeded in the daily distribution. 2 Therefore the twelve summoned the multitude of the disciples to themselves and said: “It is not good for us to abandon God's word to distribute food at the tables. 3 Therefore, brothers, seek among yourselves seven men that have good witness, full of spirit and wisdom, and we will set them to cover this need, 4 but we will still give yourselves to the praying and to the service of the Word.”

5 Ar ya quentelte nemne mára i quanda liyúmen, ar cildelte Stefáno, nér quanta saviéno ar Aire Feo, ar Filip ar Procoro ar Nicanor ar Timon ar Parmenas ar Nicolao, *quernamo Antiocello, 6 ar panyaneltet epe i aposteli, ar apa hyamie panyanelte máltat tesse.
	7 Ar Eruo quetta alle, ar i hildoron nóte oronte lintave Yerúsalemesse, ar hoa şanga *airomolíva panyaner inte nu i savie.
	8 Mal Stefáno, quanta Erulisseo ar níreo, carne taure tanwali ar tannali imíca i lie. 9 Mal oronter nelli i *yomencoallo estaina Leryanaiva, ar ennoli i túler Cireneallo ar Alexandriallo, costien as Stefáno. 10 Mal ualte polde tare i sailienna ar i fairenna yainen carampes. 11 Tá nuldave carnelte nelli quete: “Ahlárielmes quéta naiquetiéli ana Móses ar Eru.”

5 And what they said seemed good to the entire multitude, and they chose Stephen, a man full of faith and of Holy Spirit, and Philip and Procorus and Nicanor and Timon and Parmenas and Nicolaus, a proselyte from Antioch, 6 and they put them before the apostles, and after praying they placed their hands on them.
	7 And God's word grew, and the number of the disciples rose quickly in Jerusalem, and a huge crowd of priests subjected themseves [lit. put themselves under] the faith.
	8 But Stephen, full of grace and of power, made mighty signs and portents among the people. 9 But [there] arose some men from the synagogue called [the synagogue] of [the] Freed Ones, and some people that came from Cyrene and Alexandria, to quarrel with Stephen. 10 But they  could not stand against the wisdom and the spirit with which he talked. 11 Then secretly they made some men say: “We have heard him speak blasphemies against Moses and God.”

12 Ar valtanelte i lie ar i amyárar ar i parmangolmor, ar lantanelte senna ar namper se, ar tulyaneltes mir i Tára Combe. 13 Ar yaldelte furila astarmoli, i quenter: “Nér sina ua pusta quete quettar ana aire nóme sina ar ana i Şanye. 14 An ahlárielmes quéta i sina Yésus Nasaretello hatuva undu nóme sina ar vistauva i haimi yar acámielve Mósello.”
	15 Ar íre illi i hámaner i Tára Combesse yenter se, cennelte i cendelerya ná ve valo cendele.

12 And they stirred up the people and the elders and the scribes, and they fell upon him and seized him, and they brought him into the High Council. 13 And they called lying witnesses, that said: “This man does not cease to speak words against this holy place and against the Law. 14 And we have heard him say that this Jesus from Nazareth will throw down this place and will change the customs that we have received from Moses.”
	15 And when all that were sitting in the High Council looked at him, they saw that his face was like an angel's face.

RANTA 7 
Mal i héra *airimo quente: “Ma nattor sine ear sie?” 2 Eques: “Neri, hánor ar atari, hlara! I Aino Alcaro tanne inse Avraham atarinyan lan anes Mesopotamiasse, nó marnes mi Ħáran, 3 ar quentes senna: 'Á auta nórelyallo ar nosselyallo ar tula i nómenna ya tanuvan lyen.'

CHAPTER 7
But the chief priest said: “Are these matters so?” 2 He said: “Men, brothers and fathers, hear! The God of Glory showed himself to Abraham our father while he was in Mesopotamia, before he dwelt in Haran, 3 and he said to him: 'Go away from your land and from your kin and come to the place that I will show you.'

4 Tá lendes et i nórello Caldeaiva ar marne mi Ħáran. Ar talo, apa atarya qualle, Eru tyarne se leve nóre sinanna yasse elde sí marir. 5 Ananta hé ua antane sen aryono ranta sasse, yando lá i cemen nu tallunirya, mal hé antane sen i vanda i sa-antauvanes sen harieryan sa, ar apa sé erderyan, lan en pennes hína. 6 Ente, sin quente Eru, in erderya marumne ve etyar ettelea nómesse, ar i lie carumner te móli ar tyarumner tien moia, ter loar tuxi canta. 7 Ar 'i nóre yan nauvalte móli inye namuva,' quente Eru, 'ar epeta etelelyuvalte ar caruvar núromolie nin nóme sinasse.' 8 Ar sen-antanes vére *osciriéva, ar sie ónes Ísac ar *oscirne se i toltea auresse, ar Ísac óne Yácov, ar Yácov i *nossetúri yunque. 

4 Then he went out from the land of the Chaldeans and dwelt in Haran. And from there, after his father died, God caused him to move to this land in which you now dwell. 5 And yet he did not give him an heir's part in it, also [/even]not the earth under his foot-sole, but he gave him the promise that he was going to give it to him for him to possess it, and after him to his seed, while he still lacked [any] child. 6 Futhermore, this God said, that his seed was going to dwell like exiles in a foreign nation [or, land/country], and the people were going to make them thralls and were going to cause them affliction, through[out] four hundred years. 7 And 'the country [/nation] for which they will be thralls I shall judge,' said God, 'and thereafter they will go forth and will do service [núromolie: servant-work] for me in this place.' 8 And he gave him a covenant of circumcision, and thus he begat Isaac and circumcized him on the eight day, and Isaac begat Jacob, and Jacob the twelve family heads [nossetúri: kin-rulers].

9 Ar i *nossetúri, quante hrúceno Yósefenna, vancer se mir Mirrandor. Mal Eru enge óse, 10 ar etelehtanes se et ilye şangieryallon ar antane sen lisse ar sailie epe Fáro aran Mirrandoro. Ar hé panyane se turien Mirrandor ar quanda coarya. 11 Mal saicele túle i quanda nórenna Mirrandoro ar Canáano, é túra şangie, ar atarilvar uar hirne matta. 12 Mal Yácov hlasse i enge matta Mirrandoresse, ar mentanes atarilvar i minya lú. 13 Ar mí attea lú Yósef apantane inse hánoryain, ar Yósefo nosse náne carna sinwa Fáran. 14 Mentala menta, Yósef yalde Yácov atarya ar ilya nosserya, queni lempe *otoquean. 15 Yácov ununte mir Mirrandor. Ar effirnes, ve carner atarilvar, 16 ar anelte talane Hyecemenna ar aner panyane i noirisse ya Avraham ñente Ħamoro yondollon nonwen telpeo.

9 And the family heads, full of envy against Joseph, sold him into Egypt. But God was with him, 10 and he delivered him out of all his tribulations and gave him grace and wisdom before Pharaoh king of Egypt. And he put him [in office] to rule Egypt and his entire house. 11 But famine came upon he entire land of Egypt and Canaan, indeed a great tribulation, and our fathers did not find food. 12 But Jacob heard that [there] was food in Egypt, and he sent our fathers the first time. 13 And at the second time Joseph revealed himself to his brothers, and Jospeh's kin was made known to Pharaoh. 14 Sending a message, Joseph summoned Jacob his father and all his kin, seventy-five people. 15 Jacob went down into Egypt. And he expired, as did our fathers, 16 and they were brought to Shechem and were put in the tomb that Abraham got from the sons of Hamor for a sum of silver [or, money].

	17 Íre i lúme túle har i vandan ya Eru carne sinwa Avrahámen, i lie alle ar oronte túra nótenna Mirrandoresse, 18 tenna hyana aran oronte or Mirrandor, ye ua sinte Yósef. 19 Sé *yuhtane
finie atarilvannar ar carne ulco tien, mauyala te panya lapseltar ettenna, qualieltan. 20 Lúme yanasse Móses náne nóna, ar anes vanima Erun, ar anes hépina ter astari nelde coasse ataryava. 21 Mal íre anes panyana ettenna, Fáro yelde nampe se ar ortane se ve véra yondorya. 22 Ar Móses náne peantana mi ilya sailie Mirrandoro, ar anes taura mi quettaryar ar cardaryar. 
	23 Íre sámes loar *canaquean, túle mir endarya i yétumnes hánoryar, i Israelindi.
24 Ar íre cennes nér ye perpére úfailie, se-varyanes ar antane ahtarie yen perpére orme, petiénen undu i Mirra.

	17 When the time came near for the promise which God made known to Abraham, the people grew and rose to a great number in Egypt, 18 until another king arose over Egypt, who did not know Joseph. 19 He used cunning against our fathers and did evil do them, compelling them to put their babies out, for them to die. 20 At that time Moses was born, and he was beautiful to God, and he was kept for [ter = through] three months in his father's house. 21 But when he was put outside, Pharaoh's daughter took him and raised him as her own son. 22 And Moses was instructed in all the wisdom of Egypt, and he was mighty in his words and his deeds.
	23 When he had [an age of] forty years, [it] came into his heart that he would look to his brothers, the sons of Israel. 24 And when he saw a man who suffered injustice, he protected him and gave revenge to the one that suffered violence, by striking down the Egyptian.

25 Intyanes i hánoryar hanyumner in Eru antauva tien rehtie máryanen, mal ualte hanyane sa. 26 Ar i hilyala auresse túles téna lan mahtanelte, ar néves ata tala te uo rainesse, quetila: 'Neri, nalde hánor! Manen ná i carilde úfailie quén i exenna?' 27 Mal ye náne úfaila armaroryan nirne se oa, quetila: 'Man carne lyé turco ar námo or met? 28 Cé telil nahta ni, ve nacantel i Mirra noa?' 29 Sina quettanen Móses norne oa ar marne Mirian·nóresse, yasse yondo atta nánet nóne sen.
	30 Ar íre loar *canaquean náner vanwe, vala tannexe sen i ravandasse ara Oron Sinai, i uruite náresse neceltusso. 31 Íre Móses cenne sa, ya cennes quante se elmendanen. Mal íre lendes har ceşien, i Héruo óma túle: 32 'Inye atarilyaron Aino, Avrahám ar Ísac ar Yácovo Aino.' Tá palie nampe Móses, ar uas veryane ceşe ambe.

22 He supposed that his brothers were going to understand that God would [Q: will] give them salvation by his hand, but they did not understand it. 26 And on the following day he came to them while they fought, and he tried again to bring them together in peace, saying: 'Men, you are brothers! How is [it] that you do injustice one to the other?' 27 But [he] who was injust [unfair, behaving wrong] to his neighbor pushed him away, saying: 'Who made you chief and judge over us [dual]? 28 Perhaps you intend to kill me, like you killed the Egyptian yesterday?' 29 Because of this word Moses ran away and dwelt in the land of Midian, where two sons were born to him.
	30 And when forty years were gone, an angel showed himself to him in the wilderness by Mount Sinai, in the fiery flame of a thorn-bush. 31 When Moses saw it, what he saw filled him with wonder. But when he went near to examine [it], the Lord's voice came: 32 'I am the God of your fathers, the God of Abraham and Isaak and Jacob.' Then trembling seized Moses, and he did not dare to examine [any] further [ambe = more]. 

33 I Héru quente senna: 'Á mapa i hyapat talulyalto, an i nóme yasse táral aire talan ná. 34 É ecécien i ulco carna lienyan Mirrandoresse, ar ahlárien ñónielta, ar utúlien undu etelehtien te. Ar sí tula, lye-mentauvan Mirrandorenna.' 35 Móses sina ye quernelte oa, quetila: 'Man carne lyé turco ar námo?', sina nér Eru mentane ve turco ar *etelehto véla, mánen i valo ye tanne inse sen mí neceltussa. 36 Nér sina ettulyane te apa carnes tanwar ar tannar Mirrandoresse ar i Carne Earesse ar i ravandasse ter loar *canaquean.
	37 Sin quente Móses Israelindinnar: 'Eru ortauva len et hánoldallon Erutercáno ve ní.' 38 Isse ná ye enge imíca i ocombe i ravandasse as i vala ye quente senna to Oron Sinai ar as atarilvar, ar camnes coirie quetier antaven ven. 

33 The Lord said to him: 'Take your shoes from [/off] your feet, for the place on which you are standing is holy ground. 34 I have indeed seen the evil done to my people in Egypt, and I have heard their moaning, and I have come down to deliver them. And now come, I will send you to Egypt.' 35 This Moses that they turned away, saying: 'Who made you chief or judge?', this man God sent as chief and deliverer alike, by the hand of the angel that showed himself to him in the thornbush. 36 This man led them out after he did signs and portents in Egypt and in the Red Sea and in the wilderness for [ter = through] forty years.
	37 Thus Moses spoke to the Sons of Israel: 'God will raise [up] for you out of your brothers a prophet like me.' 38 He is [the one] that was among the congregation in the wilderness with the angel that spoke to him on Mount Sinai and with your fathers, and he received living sayings to give to us.

39 Canwaryannar atarilvar váquenter lasta, mal nirneltes oa ar querner inte endaltasse Mirrandorenna, 40 quetila Áronna: 'Cara men ainoli i polir mene epe me! An Móses sina, ye me-tulyane et Mirrandorello – ualme ista mana amartie sen.'
	41 Etta carnelte *mundolle yane auressen ar taller *yanca i cordonen, ar sámelte alasse  máltato tamannen. 42 Mal Eru querne inse ar antane te olla *vevien menelo hosse, ve anaie técina Erutercánoron parmasse: 'Lau inyen antanelde annar ar *yancar ter loar *canaquean i ravandasse, Nosse Israélo? 43 Mal coldelde i *lancoa Moloqua ar i elen Réfan ainoldava, i emmar yar carnelde *tyerien tai. Etta mapuvan le oa, Vável pella.'

39 To his commands our fathers refused to listen, but they pushed him away and turned themselves in their heart to Egypt, 40 saying to Aaron: 'Make for us gods that can go before us! For this Moses, who led us out of Egypt – we do not know what has happened to him.'
	41 Therefore they made a calf in those days and brought a sacrifice to the idol, and they had joy by the work of their hands. 42 But God turned himself and gave them over to serving the host of heaven, as has been written in the book of the prophets: 'Surely you did not give me gifts and sacrifices for [ter = through] forty years in the wilderness, House of Israel? 43 But you carried the tent of Moloch and the star of Rephan your god, the images that you made to worship them. Therefore I will take you away, beyond Babel [= Babylon].'

	44 Atarilvar sámer i *lancoa *vettiéva i ravandasse, ve ye quente Mósenna canne i mo carumne sa, ve i emma ya Móses cenne. 45 Ar atarilvar i camner sa yú talle sa as Yosua mir i nóre haryaina lo i lier yar Eru et-hante epe atarilvar. Tasse sa lemne tenna Láviro auri. 46 Hirnes lisse epe Eru ar arcane in isse antauva Yácovo Ainon nóme marien. 47 Mal Solomon náne ye carastane sen coa. 48 Ananta i Antara ua mare coassen cárine mainen, ve i Erutercáno quete: 49 'Menel mahalmanya ná, ar cemen tulco talunyant. Mana nostaleo coa carastuvalde nin, quete i Héru, hya mana nómenya serien? 50 Hya mánya úne ya carne ilye nati sine?'

	44 Our fathers had the tent of witness in the wilderness, like [he] who spoke to Moses commanded that one was to make it, according to the image that Moses saw. 45 And our fathers that received it brought it with Joshua into the land being possessed by the peoples that God threw out before our fathers. There it remained until David's days. 46 He found grace before God and requested that he would [Q: will] give Jacob's God a place for dwelling. 47 But Solomon was [the one] that built him a house. 48 And yet the Highest does not dwell in houses made with hands, like the prophet says: 49 'Heaven is my throne, and earth a support for my feet. What kind of house will you build for me, says the Lord, or what is my place for resting? 50 Or was not my hand what made all these things?'

	51 A nornar, *úoscírine mi enda ar hlaru, tarilde illume i Aire Feanna – tambe atarildar, síve yú elde! 52 Man imíca i Erutercánor atarildar uar roitane? Ar nacantelte i nóvo carner sinwa tulesse i Failo, ye sí ánielde olla ar anahtielde, 53 elde i camner i Şanye ve antana ter vali, mal ualde ehépie sa.”
	54 Íre hlasselde nati sine anelte círine endaltasse, ar múlelte nelciltar senna. 55 Mal isse, quanta Aire Feo, yente mir menel ar cenne Eruo alcar, ar Yésus tára ara Eruo forma. 56 Ar eques: “Yé, cenin menel pantana ar i Atanyondo tára ara Eruo forma!” 57 Mal yámelte taura ómanen ar tamper hlarultat, ar lendelte rimpe uo senna. 		

	51 O thrawn ones, uncircumcized in heart and ears, you always stand against the Holy Spirit; like your fathers, so also you! 52 Who among the prophets did your fathers not persecute? And they slew [those] who beforehand made known the coming of the Just One, whom you have now given over and you have slain, 53 you who received the Law as given through angels, but you have not kept it.  
	54 When they heard these things they were cut in their heart, and they ground their teeth against him. 55 But he, full of Holy Spirit, looked into heaven and saw God's glory, and Jesus stand by God's right hand. 56 And he said: “Behold, I see heaven opened, and the Son of Man stand by God's right hand.” 57 But they cried with a mighty voice and stopped their ears, and they went rushing together upon him.

58 Ar apa hanteltes et i ostollo hantelte sarneli senna. Ar i astarmor panyaner oa lanneltar ara nessa nér yeo esse náne Saul. 59 Ar hantelte sarneli Stefánonna lan hyamanes ar quétane: “Heru Yésus, cama fairenya!” 60 Tá lantanes occaryanta ar yáme taura ómanen: “Heru, áva note úcar sina ana te!” Ar apa quetie ta, effirnes.

58 And after they threw him out of the city they threw stones at him. And the witnesses put away their clothes by a young man whose name was Saul. 59 And they threw stones at Stephen while he was praying and saying: “Lord Jesus, receive my spirit!” 60 Then he fell upon his knees [dual] and cried with a loud voice: “Lord, do not count this sin against them!” And after saying that, he expired.

RANTA 8 
Saul şáquente i nahtie séva. 
	Yana auresse túra roitie oronte i ocombenna ya enge Yerúsalemesse; illi hequa i aposteli náner vintane ter i ménar Yúreo ar Samário. 2 Mal nelli i runcer Erullo colder Stefáno sapsaryanna, ar carnelte túra nainie sen. 3 Ono Saul lantane i ocombenna mi ita naraca lé. Lelyala mir coa apa coa ar tucila ettenna neri ar nissi véla, hanteset mir mando.

CHAPTER 8
Saul assented to the murder of him. 
	On that day a great persecution arose against the congregation which was in Jerusalem; all except the apostles were scattered through[out] the regions of Judea and Samaria. 2 But some men who feared God carried Stephen to his grave, and they made a great lamentation for him. 3 But Saul fell upon the congregation in an extremely harsh manner. Going into house after house and dragging outside men and women alike, he threw them into prison.

	4 Mal i náner vintane lender ter i nóre, carila sinwa i evandilyon pa i Quetta. 5 Filip ununte mir Samário osto ar carne i Hristo sinwa tien. 6 Er sámanen i şangar cimner i nati quétaine lo Filip lan lastanelte ar tirner i tanwar yar carnes. 7 An enger rimbali i sámer úpoice fairi, ar té etelender yamila taura ómanen. Ente, rimbali i náner *úlévime ar tapte náner nestane. 8 Etta enge olya alasse osto tanasse.
	9 Mal enge i ostosse nér estaina Símon, ye nóvo carne ñúle ar cápe Samário nóre, quetila pa inse i anes túra quén. 10 Ar illi mici te, i ampityallo i antúranna, cimner se ar quenter: “Nér sina Eruo túre ná, ya ná estaina Túra.” 11 Etta cimneltes, pan ter anda lúme anes tyériéla te tatalla ñúleryanen. 12 Mal íre sávelte i quetier Filipo, ye carne sinwe Eruo aranie ar Yésus Hristo esse, anelte sumbane, neri ar nissi véla.

	4 But those that were scattered went through the land, making known the gospel about the Word. 5 Philip went down into the city of Samaria and made the Christ known to them. 6 With one mind the crowds heeded the things being spoken by Philip while they listened and watched the signs that he did. 7 And there were numerous ones that had unclean spirits [in them], and they went out crying with a mighty voice. Furthermore, many that were lame and impeded were healed. 8 Therefore [there] was much joy in that city.
	9 But [there] was in the city a man called Simon, who beforehand did magic and startled the nation of Samaria, saying about himself that he was a great person. 10 And all among them, from the least to the greatest, gave heed to him and said: “This man is God's power, which is called Great.” 11 Therefore they gave heed to him, since for [ter = through] a long time he had caused them to marvel with his magic. 12 But when they believed the sayings of Philip, who made known God's kingdom and the name of Jesus Christ, they were baptized, men and women alike.

13 Yú Símon sáve, ar apa náve sumbana lemnes as Filip ar náne quátaina elmendanen íre tirnes i tanwar ar taure cardar yar martaner.
	14 Íre i aposteli Yerúsalemesse hlasser i Samária acámie Eruo quetta, mentanelte Péter ar Yoháno téna. 15 Lendette undu ar hyamnet camieltan Aire Fea. 16 An en uas lantane téna, mal anelte rie sumbane mí esse i Heru Yésuo. 17 Tá panyanette máttat tesse, ar camnelte Aire Fea.
	18 Sí íre Símon cenne manen i faire náne antaina paniénen mát, panyanes telpemittali epe te, 19 quetila: “Á anta yú inyen túre sina, in aiquen yesse panyan mányat camuva Aire Fea.” 20 Mal Péter quente senna: “Nai telpelya ar elye nauvat nancarne uo, pan sannel i haryumnel Eruo anna telpen!”

13 Also Simon believed, and after being baptized he remained with Philip and was being filled with wonder when he watched the sings and mighy deeds that happened.
	14 When the apostles in Jerusalem heard that Samaria had [Q: has] received God's word, they sent Peter and John to them. 15 They [dual] went down and prayed for them [pl.] to receive Holy Spirit. 16 For still it had not fallen upon them, but they were solely baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus. 17 Then they [dual] put their hands on them [pl.], and they [pl.] received Holy Spirit.
	18 Now when Simon saw how the spirit was being given by putting hands [on people], he put silver-pieces before them, 19 saying: “Give also to me this power, that anyone on whom I put my hands will receive Holy Spirit.” 20 But Peter said to him: “May your silver and you be destroyed together, since you thought that you were going to possess God's gift for money!”

21 Ualye same ranta hya masse mi natto sina, an endalya ua téra epe Eru. 22 Etta hira inwis pa olcie sina, ar á arca i Herullo in endalyo sanwe nauva apsénina lyen, 23 an cenin i nalye hloirea *sála ar naxa úfailiéva.” 24 Hanquentasse Símon quente: “Alde arca i Herullo nin, pustien i nati pa yar quentel tuliello to ninna.”
	25 Sie, apa antanelte quanta *vettie ar quenter i Heruo quetta, nanwennelte Yerúsalemenna, ar carnelte i evandilyon sinwa rimbe mastolissen i Samárearon.
	26 Mal i Héruo vala quente Filipenna, quetila: “Á orta ar mena hyarmenna i mallenna ya mene undu Yerúsalemello mir Asa.” Ta i ravandasse ná.

21 You do not have a part or a portion in this matter, for your heart is not straight before God. 22 Therefore find repentance concerning this wickedness, and ask of the Lord that your heart's thought will be forgiven you, 23 for I see that you are a poisonous gall and a bond of unrighteousness.” 24 In answer Simon said: “You make request of the Lord for me, to stop the things of which you spoke from coming upon me.”
	25 Thus, after they gave a full witness and speaking the Lord's word, they returned to Jerusalem, and they made the gospel known in numerous villages of the Samareans.
	26 But the Lord's angel spoke to Philip, saying: “Rise and go southwards to the road that goes down from Jerusalem into Gaza.” That is in the wilderness.

27 Ar orontes ar lende, ar yé! tasse túle arandur Etopiallo, taura nér nu Candáce, tári i lieo Etiopio. Anes méniéla Yérusalemenna antáven tyerme, 28 mal nanwennes ar hamme norolleryasse hentala Yesaia i Erutercáno. 29 Ar i Faire quente Filipenna: “Mena hare i norollenna ar ása himya!” 30 Filip norne ara sa ar hlasse se hentala Yesaia i Erutercáno, ar eques: “Ma nanwave hanyal mana hental?” 31 Eques: “Manen ecuva nin hanya ire penin aiquen ye tanuva nin mana teas?” Ar arcanes Filipello tule mir i norolle hamien óse. 33 Mal i ranta i tehteleo ya hentanes náne si: “Ve máma anes talana i nahtienna, ar ve eule ye ómalóra ná epe ye hocire tórya, uas pantane antorya. 33 Nucumieryasse i námie náne mapana oa sello. Pa *nónarerya man nyaruva? An coivierya anaie mapana oa cemello.”

27 And he arose and went, and behold! there came a minister [arandur, king's servant] from Ethiopia, a mighty man under Candace, queen of the people of Ethiopia. He had gone to Jerusalem to give worship, 28 but he returned and sat in his cart reading Isaiah the prophet. 29 And the Spirit said to Philip: “Go near to the cart and stick to it!” 30 Philip ran beside it and heard him read Isaiah the prophet, and he said: “Do you truly understand what you read?” 31 He said: “How will it be possible for me to understand when I lack anyone who will show me what it means?” And he requested of Philip to come into the cart to sit with him. 33 But the part of the scripture that he read was this: “Like a sheep he was being brought to the slaughter, and like a lamb that is voiceless before [the one] ho cuts off its wool, he did not open his mouth. 33 In his humiliation the judgement was taken away from him. About his generation who will tell? For his life has been taken away from earth.”

	34 Hanquentasse i arandur quente: “Maquetin lye, pa man i Erutercáno quete si? Pa inse hya pa hyana quén?” 35 Filip pantane antorya, ar *yestala tehtele sinallo carnes sinwa sen i evandilyon pa Yésus. 36 Sí íre lendette i mallesse, túlette nómenna yasse enge nén, ar i arandur quente: “Ela, nén! Mana pusta ni návello sumbana?” 37 Filip hanquente: “Qui savil quanda endalyanen, ta pole marta.” 38 Ar cannes i norollen hauta, ar yúyo lendet mir i nén, Filip ar i arandur uo, ar sumbanéses. 39 Apa túlette ama i nenello, i Héruo faire lintave tulyane Filip oa, ar i arandur ua cenne se ambe, an hé lende malleryasse mi alasse. 40 Mal Filip náne hírina Asotosse, ar lendes ter i ména ar carne i evandilyon sinwa ilye i ostoin tenna rahtanes Cesareanna.

	34 In answer the minister said: “I ask you, about whom does the prophet say this? About himself or about another person?” 35 Philip opened his mouth, and beginning from this scripture he made known to him the gospel about Jesus. 36 Now while they [dual] went on the road, they came to a place where [there] was water, and the minister said: “Look, water! What stops me form being baptized?” 37 Philip answered: “If you believe with all your heart, that can happen.” 38 And he commanded the cart to halt, and both went into the water, Philip and the minister together, and he baptized him. 39 After they [dual] came up form the water, the Lord's spirit quickly led Philip away, and the miniser did not see him [any]more, and he went on his road in joy. 40 But Philip was found in Asoto [Azotus, Ashdod], and he went through the region and made the gospel known to all the cities until he reached Caesarea.

RANTA 9 
Mal Saul, en şúyala *lurwe ar nahtie i Heruo hildonnar, lende i héra *airimonna ar arcane sello mentar i *yomencoain Lamascusse, talieryan nútina Yerúsalemenna aiquen ye hirnes náne i Malleo, neri ar nissi véla.
	3 Lendaryasse, íre túlanes hare ana Lamascus, rincanen caltane *os se cala menello, 4 ar apa lantie i talamenna hlasses óma quéta senna: “Saul, Saul, mana castalya roitien ni?” 5 Eques: “Man nalye, Heru?” Eques: “Inye Yésus, ye elye roita! 6 Mal á orya ar tula mir i osto, ar ya mauya lyen care nauva nyárina lyen.”   
	7 I neri i lender óse tarner úpe, an hlasselte i óma, mal uar cenne aiquen. 8 Mal Saul oronte i talamello, ar ómu henyat nánet pante cennes munta. Etta tulyaneltes i mánen ar taller se mir Lamascus. 9 Ar ter rí nelde cennes munta, ar uas mante hya sunce.

CHAPTER 9
But Paul, still breathing threat and murder against the disciples of the Lord, went to the chief priest and asked him for letters [lit. asked from him messages] for the synagogues in Damascus, for him to bring bound to Jerusalem anyone that he found was of the Way, men and women alike.
	3 On his journey, when was coming near to Damascus, suddenly [there] shone around him a light from heaven, 4 and after falling to the ground he heard a voice say to him: “Saul, Saul, what is your reason for persecuting me?” 5 He said: “Who are you, Lord?” He said: “I [am] Jesus, whom you persecute! 6 But rise and come into the city, and [that] which is necessary for you to do will be told to you.”
	7 The men that went with him stood dumb, for they heard the voice, but did not see anyone. 8 But Saul arose from the ground, and though his eyes were open he saw nothing. Therefore they led him by the hand and brought him into Damascus. 9 And for three days he saw nothing, and he did not eat or drink.

10 Enge Lamascusse hildo yeo esse náne Ananías, ar i Heru quente senna mi maur: “Ananías!” Eques: “Sisse ean, Heru.” 11 I Heru quente senna: “Á orya, mena i mallenna estaina Téra, ar mi coarya Yúras á cesta nér estaina Saul, ho Tarsus. An ye! hyámas, 12 ar ecénies mi maur nér estaina Ananías túla minna ar panyea máryat sesse, cenieryan ata.” 13 Mal Ananías hanquente: “Heru, ahlárien rimbalillon pa nér sina, pa ilye i olce nati yar carnes airilyain Yerúsalemesse. 14 Ar sisse acámies túre i hére *airimollon nutien illi i yalir esselyanen.” 15 Mal i Heru quente senna: “Mena, an nér sina ná nin cílina tamma, colien essenya i nórennar ar arannar ar Israelindinnar véla. 16 An inye tanuva sen ilqua ya mauyuva sen perpere essenyan.” 

10 [There] was in Damascus a disciple whose name was Ananias, and the Lord said to him in a vision: “Ananias!” He said: “Here I am, Lord.” 11 The Lord said to him: “Rise, go to the street called Straigth, and in the house of Judas seek a man called Saul, from Tarsus. For look! he is praying, 12 and he has seen in a vision a man called Ananias come in and put his hands on him, for him to see again.” 12 But Ananias answered: “Lord, I have heard from numerous ones about this man, about all the evil things that he did to your holy ones in Jerusalem. 14 And here he has received power from the chief priests to bind all that call on your name.” 15 But the Lord said to him: “Go, for this man is for me a chosen tool, to bear my name to the nations and to kings and to [the] sons of Israel alike. 16 For I will show him everything that it is necessary for him to suffer for my name.”
	
	17 Tá Ananías lende, ar túles mir i coa, ar panyanes máryat sesse ar quente: “Saul, háno – i Heru, i Yésus ye tanne inse lyen i mallesse yasse túlel, ni-ementaye cenielyan ata ar návelyan quátina Aire Feo.” 18 Ar mi imya lú lantane henyalto ya nemne ve hyalmali, ar poldes ata cene, ar orontes ar náne sumbana. 19 Tá mantes ar náne turyana.
	Rélissen lemnes as i hildor Lamascusse, 20 ar pen hopie carnes Yésus sinwa i *yomencoassen, in isse i Eruion ná. 21 Mal illi i hlasser se náner quátine elmendanen ar quenter: “Ma nér sina ua ye Yerúsalemesse nancarne illi i yalir sina essenen, ar ye túle sir i ennen i tulyauvanes te nútine i hére *airimonnar?” 22 Mal Saul náne turyaina, ar carnes i Yúrar i marner Lamascusse aqua rúcine taniénen i Yésus ná i Hristo.

	17 Then Ananias went, and he came into the house, and he put his hands on him and said: “Saul, brother – the Lord, the Jesus that showed himself to you on the road on which you came, has sent me for your to see again and for you to be filled with Holy Spirit.” 18 And in the same moment [there] fell from his eyes [dual] what seemed like shells, and he could again see, and he arose and was baptized. 19 Then he ate and was strengthened.
	For some days he remained with the disciples in Damascus, 20 and without waiting he made Jesus known in the synagogues, that he is the Son of God. 21 But all that heard him were filled with wonder and said: “Is this man not [the one] who in Jerusalem destroyed all that call on this name, and who came here for the purpose that he was going to lead them bound to the chief priests? 22 But Saul was being strengthened, and he made the Jesus that dwelt in Damascus wholly confused by showing that Jesus is the Christ.

	23 Apa fárea nóte rélion i Yúrar carner úvie uo, pa manen nancarumneltes. 24 Mal panolta senna olle sinwa Saulen. Ono yú tirnelte i andor harive, auresse yo lómisse véla, nancarien se. 25 Etta hildoryar namper se ar mentaner se undu *rappanen *vircolcasse ter assa i rambasse.
	26 Íre túles Yerúsalemenna néves *erta inse i hildoin, mal illi runcer sello, pan ualte sáve i anes hildo. 27 Mal Varnavas nampe se ar talle se i apostelinnar, ar nyarnes tien ilqua pa manen i mallesse cennes i Heru, ar i hé quente senna, ar manen Lamascusse quentes veriénen mi Yésuo esse. 28 Ar lemnes aselte, lelyala minna ar ettenna Yerúsalemesse, quetila veriénen mí Heruo esse, 29 carpala ar costala as i Yúrar i quenter Hellenya. Mal té carner panoli nancarien se. 30 Íre i hánor túner ta, talleltes undu Césareanna ar mentaner se oa ana Tarsus. 

	23 After a sufficient number of days the Jews made a consideration together, about how they were going to destroy him. 24 But their plan against him became known to Paul. But they also watched the gates closely, day and night alike, to destroy him. 25 Therefore his disciples took him and sent him down by rope in a basket through a hole in the wall.
	26 When he came to Jerusalem he tried to join [lit. unite himself to] the disciples, but all feared him, since they did not believe that he was a disciple. 27 But Barnabas took him and brought him to the apostles, and he told them everything about how in on the road he saw the Lord, and that he spoke to him, and how in Damascus he spoke with boldness in Jesus' name. 28 And he remained with them, going in and out in Jerusalem, speaking with boldness in the Lord's name, 29 talking and quarreling with the Jews that spoke Greek. But they made plans to destroy him. 30 When the brothers perceived that, they brought him to Caesarea and sent him away to Tarsus.

	31 Sí i ocombe mi quanda Yúrea ar Alilea sáme raine ar náne carastaina ama, ar lan vantanelte ruciesse i Herullo ar mí Aire Feo tiutale, nótelta oronte.
	32 Sí íre Péter lende ter ilye ménar túles undu yú i airinnar i marner Lirdasse. 33 Tasse hirnes nér estaina Éneas, ye náne caitiléla tulmaryasse loassen tolto, pan anes *úlévima. 34 Ar Péter quente senna: “Éneas, Yésus Hristo nesta lye. Á orya ar á *parta caimalya!” Ar oronyes mí imya lú. 35 Ar illi i marner mi Lirda ar Hyaron cenner se, ar querneltexer i Herunna.

	31 Now the congregation in all of Judea and Galilee had peace and was being built up, and while they walked in fear of the Lord and in the comfort of the Holy Spirit, their number rose.
	32 Now when Peter went through all regions he came down also to the holy ones that dwelt in Lydda. 33 There he found a man called Aeneas, who had lain on his bier for eight years, since he was lame. 34 And Peter said to him: “Aeneas, Jesus Christ heals you. Rise and arrange your bed!” And he arose in the same moment. 35 And all that dwelt in Lydda and Sharon saw him, and they turned to the Lord.

	36 Mal Yoppasse enge *hilde yeo esse náne Tavişa, ya tea Lorcas. Anes quanta máre cardaron ar annaron oraviéva yar carnes. 37 Mal ente auressen olles hlaiwa ar qualle. Sóveltes ar panyaner se i oromardesse. 38 Pan Lirda náne hare Yoppanna, íre i hildor hlasser i Péter enge osto tanasse mentanelte nér atta senna arcien sello: “Áva na telwa tuliesse menna!” 39 Tá Péter oronte ar lende aselte. Ar íre túles tar, tulyaneltes mir i oromar, ar ilye i *verulórar tarner óse nírelissen, tanala sen rimbe laupeli ar collali yar Lorcas carner lan en enges aselte. 40 Mal Péter mentane illi ettenna, lantane occaryanta ar hyamne. Tá, quériéla inse i hroanna, quentes: “Tavişa, á orya!” Hé pantane henduryat, ar cenila Péter he hamme ama. 41 Péter antane hen márya ar ortane he, ar yaldes i airi ar i *verulórar ar panyane he epe te coirea. 
	42 Natto sina olle sinwa illin Yoppasse, ar rimbali sáver i Herusse. 43 Fárea nótesse rélion lemnes Yoppasse as nér estaina Símon, *alumo.

	36 But in Joppa there was a female disiciple whose name was Tabitha, which means Dorcas [= Gazelle]. She was full of good deeds and gifts of mercy that she did. 37 But in those days she became ill and died. They washed her and put her in the upper room. 38 Since Lydda was near to Joppa, when the disciples heard that Peter was in that city they sent two men to him to request of him: “Do not be late in coming to us!” 39 They Peter arose and went with them. And when he came thither, they led him into the upper room, and all the widows stood with him in tears, showing him many tunics and cloaks that Dorcas made while she was still with them. 40 But Peter sent all outside, fell upon his knees and prayed. Then, after turning [Q: turning himself] to the body, he said: “Tabitha, rise!” She opened her eyes, and seeing Peter she sat up. 41 Peter gave her his hand and raised her [up], and he called the holy ones and the widows and put her before them alive.
	42 This matter became known to all in Joppa, and numerous ones believed in the Lord. 43 For a sufficient number of days he remained in Joppa with a man called Simon, a leather-worker.

RANTA 10 
Enge nér Césareasse estaina Cornelio, *tuxantur i hosseranto estaina i Itála, 2 ye náne *ainocimya ar runce Erullo as quanda nosserya, ar antanes rimbe annali oraviéva i lien ar hyámane Erunna illume. 3 *Os i nertea lúme cennes mi maur Eru vala túla minna senna ar quéta senna: “Cornelio!” 4 I nér yente se, ar nála ruhtaina quentes: “Mana meril, Heru?” Quentes senna: “Hyamielyar ar annalyar oraviéva orontier ve enyalie epe Eru. 5 Ar sí, á menta nelli Yoppanna ar yala quén estaina Símon, ye same i epesse Péter. 6 Nér sina mare coasse quenwa yeo esse Símon ná, *alumo, ye same coa ara i ear.”

CHAPTER 10
There was a man in Caesarea called Cornelius, a centurion of the army division [hosse-ranta] called the Italian, 2 who was reverent and feared God with his entire family, and he gave many gifts of mercy to the people and was praying to God always. 3 Around the ninth hour he saw in a vision an angel of God come inside to him and saying to him: “Cornelius!” 4 The man looked at him, and being frightened he said: “What do you want, Lord?” He said to him: “Your prayers and your gifts of mercy have ascended like a reminder before God. 5 And now, send some men to Joppa and call a person called Simon, who has the nickname Peter. 6 This man dwells in [the] house of a man whose name is Simon, a leather-worker, who has his house by the sea.”

	7 Apa i vala ye quente senna lende oa, yaldes atta i núroron coaryo ar *ainocimya ohtar ho imíca i lemner óse, 8 ar nyarnes ilqua tien ar te-mentane Yoppanna.
	9 I hilyala auresse, íre engelte lendaltasse ar túlaner hare i ostonna, Péter lende ama i tópanna *os i enquea lúme, hyamien. 10 Mal anes maita ar merne mate. Lan manwanelte, lendes mir maur 11 ar cenne menel pantana ar nostaleo vene ya túle undu ve hoa talat *páşeva, 12 ar sasse enger ilye nostaleron *cantalyar ar hlicilar ar aiwi menelo. 13 Ar óma túle senna: “Á orta, Péter, á nahta ar á mate!” 14 Mal eque Péter: “Laume, Heru, an munta vahtana ar úpoica oi amátien!”

	7 After the angel who spoke to him went away, he called two of the servants of his house and a reverent soldier from among those that remained with him, 8 and he told them everything and sent them to Joppa.
	9 On the following day, when they were on their journey and were coming near to the city, Peter went up to the roof around the sixth hour, in order to pray. 10 But he was hungry and wanted to eat. While they prepared, he went into a vision 11 and saw heaven opened and some kind of vessel that came down like  a huge sheet of linen, 12 and in it [there] were all kinds of four-legged [beasts] and creeping things and birds of heaven. 13 And a voice came to him: “Rise, Peter, slaughter and eat!” 14 But Peter said: “By no means, Lord, for nothing defiled or unclean have I ever eaten!”

15 Ar i óma quente senna attea lú: “Áva esta vahtane yar Eru opoitie!” 16 Si martane neldea lú, ar tá i vene náne mapana mir menel. 
	17 Íre Péter en náne ita iltanca pa mana i maur ya anes céniéla tenge, yé! i neri mentane lo Cornelio tarner epe i ando apa maquetie tielta i coanna Símonwa. 18 Lan Péter sanne pa i maur, i faire quente: “Yé! Neri nelde lye-cestear. 20 Mal mena undu ar áte hilya, ar áva na iltanca pa *aiqua, an inye ementaye te.” 21 Sie Péter ununte ar quente i nerinnar: “Yé, inye ná ye cestealde. Mana castalda tulien sir?”

15 And the voice said to him a second time: “Do not call defiled [the things] that God has cleansed!” 16 This happened a third time, and then the vessel was taken into heaven.
	17 While Peter was still very uncertain about what the vision that he had seen signified, behold! the men sent by Cornelius stood before the gate after asking their way to the house of Simon. 18 While Peter thought about the vision, the spirit said: “Behold! Three men are seeking you. 20 But go down and follow them, and do not be uncertain about anything, for I have sent them.” 21 Thus Peter went down and said to the men: “Behold, I am [the one] that you are seeking. What is your reason for coming here?”

22 Quentelte: “Cornelio i *tuxantur, nér faila ar *ainocimya, pa ye i quanda liende Yúraron quetir mai, acámie canwa ter aire vala pa mentáve elyen, tulielyan coaryanna ar hlarieryan quetielyar.” 23 Tá arcanes tello tule minna, ar camneset ve *naşali.
	I hilyala auresse orontes ar lende oa aselte, ar ennoli i hánoron Yoppasse lender óse. 24 Er ré epeta lendes mir Césarea. Cornelio, hopila tulieltan, nóvo yalde uo i queni onosseryo ar hari meldoryar. 25 Íre Péter lende minna, Cornelio velde se, lantane undu epe taluryat ar antane sen tyerme. 26 Mal Péter ortane se, quetila: “Á orta; yú inye atan ná!” 27 Ar lan quétanes óse, mittanes ar hirne rimbe ennoli ocómienwe.

22 They said: “Cornelius the centurion, a man just and reverent, of whom the whole nation of [the] Jews speak well, has received a command through a holy angel about sending for you, for you to come to his house and for him to hear your sayings.” 23 Then he requested of them to come inside, and he received them as guests.
	On the following day he arose and went with them, and some of the brothers in Joppa went with him. 24 One [24-hour] day thereafter he went into Caesarea. Cornelius, waiting for their coming, beforehand called together the people of his family and his close friends. 25 When Peter went inside, Cornelius met him, fell down before his feet and gave him worship. 26 But Peter raised him [up], saying: “Rise; I as well am a man!” 27 And while he was speaking with him, he entered and found numerous people assembled. 

28 Ar quentes téna: “Istalde mai manen Yúran ná aqua ana i Şanye *erta inse quenen hyana nóreo, hya mene mir coarya. Ananta Eru tanne nin i ávan esta aiquen vahtana hya úpoica. 29 Etta é túlen, ú quetiéno ana yalielya íre anen tultaina. Etta maquetin: Mana castalya mentaven nin?”
	30 Ar Cornelio quente: “Auri canta yá, notila lúme sinallo, hyamnen coanyasse íre yé! nér arwa calima larmo tarne epe ni 31 ar quente: “Cornelio, hyamielya anaie hlárina, ar annalyar oraviéva anaier enyáline epe Eru. 32 Etta á menta Yoppanna ar yala Símon, ye same i epesse Péter. Nér sina *naşal ná coasse hyana Símonwa, *alumo, ara i ear.” 32 Etta mí imya lúme mentanen lyenna, ar carnel mai tuliénen sir. Ar sie lúme sinasse illi mici me nar sisse epe Eru, hlarien ilye i nati yar i Heru acánie lyen quete.”

28 And he said to them: “You know well how to a Jew [it] is wholly against the Law to unite himself to a person of another nation, or to go into his house. And yet God showed me that I am not to call anyone defiled or unclean. 29 Therefore I indeed came, without speaking against your calling when I was being summoned. Therefore I ask: What is your reason for sending to me?”
	30 And Cornelius said: “Four days ago, counting from this hour, I prayed in my house when behold! a man with bright garment stood before me 31 and said: “Cornelius, your prayer has been heard, and your gifts of mercy have been remembered before God. 32 Therefore send to Joppa and call [for] Simon, who has the nickname Peter. This man is a guest in the house of another Simon, a leather-worker, by the sea.” 32 Therefore in the same hour I sent [people] to you, and you did well by coming here. And so in this hour all among us are here before God, to hear all the things that the Lord has commanded you to say.”

	34 Tá Péter pantane antorya ar quente: “Nanwave tuntan i Eru ua cime cendeler, 35 mal ilya nórello camis mai i quén ye ruce sello ar care failie. 36 Mentanes i quetta Israelindinnar carien sinwa tien i evandilyon raineva ter Yésus Hristo; isse Heru illion ná. 37 Istalde i quetie ya lende ter i quanda Yúrea, *yestala Alileallo apa i sumbie pa ya Yoháno carampe – 38 pa Yésus Násaretello, manen Eru se-*líve Aire Feanen ar túrenen, ar lendes ter i nóre, carila mánar ar nestala illi innar i Arauco túre lumnane, an Eru náne óse. 39 Ar illi mici me nar astarmoli i nation yar carnes mí Yúraron nóre ar mi Yerúsalem véla, mal yú nacanteltes lingiénen se aldasse. 40 Sé Eru ortane i neldea auresse ar láve sen tana inse, 

	34 Then Peter opened his mouth and said: “Truly I perceive that God does not heed faces [= is not partial], 35 but from every nation he receives well the person that fears him and does righteousness. 36 He sent the word to [the] sons of Israel to make known to them the gospel of peace through Jesus Chrsit; he is Lord of all. 37 You know the saying that went through the entire Judea, beginning from Galilee after the baptism about which John talked – 38 about Jesus from Nazareth, how God annointed him with Holy Spirit and with power, and he went through the land, doing good deeds and healing all upon which the Devil's power lay heavy, for God was with him. 39 And all among us are witnesses of the things that he did in the land of the Jews and in Jerusalem alike, but they also killed him by hanging him on a tree. 40 Him God raised on the third day and allowed him to show himself, 

41 lá i quanda lien, mal astarmolin cíline lo Eru – elmen, i manter ar suncer óse apa ortaverya et qualinallon. 42 Ar cannes men care sinwa i lien, ar anta tien *vettie, i nér sina náne ye Eru apánie ve 
námo coirearon ar qualinaron. 43 Pa sé ilye i Erutercánor quenter – in ilquen ye save sesse came apsenie úcariva esseryanen.”
	44 Lan Péter en quétane pa nati sine, i Aire Fea lantane illinnar i hlasser i quetta. 45 Ar i vorondar i náner tulinwe as Péter, té i náner i *osciriéva, náner quátine elmendanen pan i anna Aire Feava náne ulyaina yando Úyúrannar. 46 An hlasseltet quéta lambalínen ar laitea Eru. Tá Péter quente: “Ma aiquen pole váquete ten i nén, pustien návello sumbane neri sine i acámier i imya Aire Fea ya yando elve acámier?” 48 Ar cannes tien náve sumbane Yésus Hristo essenen. Tá arcanelte sello i lemyumnes aselte ter aureli.

41 not to the entire people, but to witnesses chosen by God – to us, that ate and drank with him after his raising from [the] dead. 42 And he commanded us to make known to the people, and to give them witness, that this man was [the one] whom God has placed as judge of living ones and dead ones. 43 About him all the Prophets spoke – that everyone who believes in him receives forgiveness of sins by his name.”
	44 While Peter still was still speaking about these things, the Holy Spirit fell upon all that heard the word. 45 And the faithful that had come with Peter, those that were of the circumcision, were filled with wonder since the gift of Holy Spirit was poured [out] also upon non-Jews. 46 And they heard them speak in tongues and praise God. Then Peter said: “Can anyone deny them the water, to stop from being baptized these men that have received the same Holy Spirit that we as well have received?” 48 And he commanded them to be baptized by the name of Jesus Christ. Then they requested of him that he would remain with them for [ter, through] some days.

RANTA 11 
Sí i aposteli ar i hánor i enger Yúreasse hlasser in Úyúrali yú camner Eruo quetta. 2 Mal íre Péter lende ama Yerúsalemenna, i queni *oscíriéva cóşer óse, 3 quetila i lendes mir i coa neriva i úner *oscírine ar mante aselte. 4 Tá Péter *yestane nyare tien ilqua ve anes martiéla, quetila:
	5 “Engen Yoppa·ostosse íre cennen maur, nostaleo vene ya túle undu ve hoa talat *páşeva, mentaina undu menello vincaryainen canta, ar túles hare ninna. 6 Yétala mina sa tirnen ar cenne cemeno *cantalyar ar i hravani celvar ar i hlicilar ar menelo aiwi. 7 Yú hlassen óma quéta ninna: Á orta, Péter, á nahta ar mate!

CHAPTER 11
Now the apostles and the brother that were in Judea heard that some non-Jews also received God's word. 2 But when Peter went up to Jerusalem, the people of circumcision quarreled with him, 3 saying that he had gone [Q: went] into the house of men that were not circumcized and had eaten [Q: ate] with them. 4 Then Peter began to tell them everything as it had happened, saying:
	“I was in Joppa city when I saw a vision, a kind of vessel that came down like a huge sheet of linen, being sent down from heaven by its four corners, and it came near to me. 6 Looking into it I watched and saw the four-legged creatures of earth and the wild beasts and the creeping things and the birds of heaven. 7 I also heard a voice say to me: Rise, Peter, slaughter and eat!

8 Mal quenten: Laume, Heru, an munta vahtana hya úpoica oi utúlie mir antonya!  9 Attea lú i óma menello hanquente: Áva esta úpoice yar Eru opoitie! 10 Si martane neldea lú, ar ilqua náne túcina nan mir menel. 11 Ar yé! mi yana lú neri nelde tarner ara i coa yasse anelme, an anelte mentane Césareallo ninna. 12 Etta i faire canne nin mene aselte, lá nála iltanca pa *aiqua. Mal hánor enque sine yú lender asinye, ar lendelme mir i coa i nerwa. 13 Nyarnes men manen cennes i vala tára mi coarya, quetila: Á menta nelli Yoppanna ar á tulta Símon ye same i epesse Péter, 14 ar quetuvas lyenna quetiéli yainen nauval rehtana, elye ar nosselya. 15 Mal íre inye *yestane quete, i faire lantane téna aqua ve lantanes yú venna i yestasse. 

8 But I said: By no means, Lord, for nothing defiled or unclean has ever come into my mouth! 9 A second time the voice from heaven answered: Do not call unclean [the things] that God has cleansed! 10 This happened a third time, and everthing was drawn back into heaven. 11 And behold! in that moment three men stood by the house that we were in, for they were sent from Caesarea to me. 12 Therefore the spirit commanded me to go with them, not being uncertain about anything. But these six brothers also went with me, and we went into the man's house. 13 He told us how he saw the angel stand in his house, saying: Send some men to Joppa and summon Simon who has the nick-name Peter, 14 and he will speak to you sayings by which you will be saved, you and your family. 15 But when I began to speak, the spirit fell upon them just as it fell also upon us in the beginning.

16 Tá enyalden i Heruo quetie, manen quentes: Yoháno sumbane nennen, mal elde nauvar sumbane Aire Feanen. 17 Etta, qui Eru antane i imya anna tien ve elven i asávier mí Heru Yésus Hristo, man inye ná, i poluvan pusta Eru?”
	18 Sí íre hlasselte nati sine, quentelte munta amba ana se, ar antanelte alcar Erun, quetila: “Tá Eru é ánie inwis tulyala coivienna yú Úyúrain.”
	19 Etta i náner vintane i şangiénen ya oronte pa Stefáno lender tenna Fenícia ar Ciprus ar Antioc, mal quentelte i quetta rie i Yúrannar. 20 Mal mici te enger nelli ho Ciprus ar Ciréne i túler Antiocenna ar caramper pa i evandilyon i Heru Yésuo yú innar quenter Hellenya. 21 Ente, i Heruo má enge aselte, ar hoa nóte sáver ar querner inte i Herunna. 

16 Then I recalled the Lord's saying, how he said: John baptized with water, but you will be baptized with Holy Spirit. 17 Therefore, if God gave the same gift to them as to ourselves that have believed in the Lord Jesus Christ, who am I, that I will be able to stop God?”
	18 Now when they heard these things, they said nothing more against him, and they gave glory to God, saying: “Then God has indeed given repentance leading to life also to non-Jews.”
	19 Therefore [those] that were scattered by the tribulation that arose concerning Stephen went as far as Phoenicia and Cyprus and Antioch, but they spoke the word only to the Jews. 20 But among them were some men from Cyprus and Cyrene that came to Antioch and talked about the gospel of the Lord Jesus also to [those] that spoke Greek. 21 Furthermore, the Lord's hand was with them, and a great number believed and turned themselves to the Lord. 

	22 I nyarna pa te túle i hlarunna i ocombeo ya enge Yerúsalemesse, ar mentanelte Varnavas tenna Antioc. 23 Íre túles tar ar cenne Eruo lisse, sámes alasse ar hortane te holmo lemya Eruo indómesse, 24 an anes mane nér ar quanta Aire Feo ar saviéno. Ar hoa şanga náne napánina i Herun. 25 Tá lendes oa Tarsusenna cestien Saul, 26 ar apa hirnes hé, tulyanes hé Antiocenna. Sie túle i ter quanta loa ocomnette aselte i ocombesse ar peantanet hoa şanga, ar Antiocesse i hildor náner mí minya lú estaine *Hristonduri.
	27 Yane auressen túler Erutercánoli undu Yerúsalemello Antiocenna. 28 Quén mici te, yeo esse náne Ahavo, oronte ar carne sinwa i Fairenen i tulumne túra saicele i quanda ambarenna. Ta é túle mi réryar Claurio. 29 Etta i sámer amba lá maurelta cilder menta mána i hánonnar i marner Yúreasse. 30 Ar sie carnelte, mentala sa i amyárannar Varnavas ar Saulo mánen.

	22 The story about them came to the ears [dual] of the congregation which was in Jerusalem, and they sent Barnabas as far as Antioch. 23 When he came there and saw God's grace, he had joy and urged them sincerely to remain in God's will, 24 for he was a good man and full of Holy Spirit and of faith. And a great crowd was added to the Lord. 25 Then he went away to Tarsus to seek Saul, 26 and after he found him, he led him to Antioch. Thus it came [about] that for a full year they [dual] assembled with them in the congregation and taught a huge crowd, and in Antioch the disciples were for the first time called Christians [Hristonduri, Christ-servants].
	27 In those days [there] came prophets down from Jerusalem to Antioch. 28 One among them, whose name was Agabus, arose and made known by the Spirit that [there] was going to come a great famine upon the entire world. That indeed came in the days of Claudius. 29 Therefore [those] that had more than their need chose to send assistance [mána: a boon] to the brothers that were in Judea. 30 And so they did, sending it to the elders by the hand of Barnabas and Saul.
	
RANTA 12 
*Os yana lúme Herol i Aran panyane mát ennolinnar i ocombeo, carien tien ulco. 2 Nacantes Yácov, hánorya Yoháno, macilden. 3 Cenila manen i Yúrar sanner mai pa ta, yú nampes Péter. Ta martane auressen *alapulúne massaron. 4 Apa nampes hé, panyanes he mandosse, antala he mannar combion canta, ilya arwa ohtarion canta, an teldes tana he i lien apa i Lahtie. 5 Sie Péter náne hépina mandosse, mal i quanda ocombe veassenen hyámane Erunna sen. 

CHAPTER 12 
Around that time Herod the King laid hands on some persons of the congregation, to evil to them. 2 He killed Jacob, the brother of Jacob, by sword. 3 Seeing how the Jews thought well about that, he also seized Peter. That happened in the days of unleavened breads. 4 After he seized him, he put him in prison, giving him into the hands of four groups, each having four soldiers, for he intended to show him to the people. 5 Thus Peter was kept in prison, but the entire congregation was intensely [veassenen: with vigour] praying to God for him. 

	6 I lómisse nó Herol se-tulyumne epe i lienna, Péter náne lorna, nútina naxenen atta imbe ohtar atta, ar cundoli epe i fenda hemper i mando. 7 Mal yé! i Heruo vala tarne ara se, ar cala caltane i şambesse. Tamila Pétero hroa hé eccoitane se, quetila: “Á orta lintave!” Ar naxeryar lantaner máryalto. 8 I vala quente senna: “Á panya qualtalya *os oşwelya ar nuta hyapalyat talulyatse!” Carnes sie. Ar hé quente senna: “Á panya collalya hroalyasse ar áni hilya!” 9 Ar lendes ettenna ar hilyane he, mal uas sinte i ya marta i valanen nanwa ná. Intyanes i cénas maur. 10 Lahtala i minya cundo, ar i attea, túlette i angaina andonna tulyala mir i osto, ar ta pantanexe tun. Ar apa lendette ettenna vantanette undu er malle, ar mi yana lú i vala oante sello.

6 In the night before Herod was going to lead him before the people, Peter was asleep, bound with two chains between to soldiers, and some guards before the door kept the gaol. 7 But behold! the Lord's angel stood by him, and a light shone in the room. Tapping Peter's body he woke him up, saying: “Rise quickly!” And his chains fell from his hands. 8 The angel said to him: “Put your girt around your hips and tie your shoes on your feet!” He did so. And he said to him: “Put your cloak on your body and follow me!” 9 And he went outside and followed him, but he did now know that what happened [Q: happens] by the angel was [Q: is] true. He supposed that he saw  [Q: is seeing] t a vision. 10 Passing by the first guard, and the second, they came to the iron gate leading into the city, and that opened itself to them. And after they [dual] went outside they walked down one street, and in that moment the angel went away from him.

11 Ar Péter, hirila inse, quente: “Sí istan i mentane i Heru valarya ar ni-etelehtane ho Herolo má ar ilquallo ya i Yúralie hópa.”
	12 Apa carie úvie lendes coanna Maríava, amil Yoháno ye sáme i epesse Marco. I coasse fárea nóte queniva náner ocómienwe, hyámala. 13 Íre tambanes ana i fenna, inya mól yeo esse náne Rola túle latien, 14 ar íre *atsintes Pétero óma, alasseryanen uas latyane i ando, mal nornes minna ar nyarne i Péter tára epe i ando. 15 Quentelte senna: “Nalye ettesse sámalyo!” Mal quentes veassenen i sie ea. Quentelte: “Valarya ná.” 16 Mal Péter lemne yasse enges, tambala. Íre latyanelte, cenneltes ar náner captane. 17 Mal carnes tien hwerme máryanen, náveltan quilde, ar nyarnes tien ilqua pa manen i Heru se-tulyane et mandollo, ar eques: “Nyara nati sine Yácoven ar i hánoin.” Tá mennes ettenna ar lende hyana nómenna.

11 And Peter, finding himself, said: “Now I know that the Lord sent his angel and delivered me from Herod's hand and from everything that the people of the Jews is waiting for.»
	12 After making a consideration he went to the house of Mary, mother of John who had the nickname Mark. In the house a quite large [fárea: sufficient] number of people were assembled, praying. 13 When he knocked on [ana: against] the door, a female slave whose name was Rhoda came to open, 14 and when she recognized Peter's voice, for [-nen] her joy she did not open the gate, but ran inside and told that Peter was standing [Q: is standing] before the door. 15 They said to her: “You are out of your mind!” But she said forcefully [veassenen: with vigour] that so it was [Q: is]. They said: “It is his angel.” 16 But Peter remained where he was, knocking. When they opened, they saw him and were startled. 17 But he made a gesture to them with his hand, for them to be silent, and he told them everything about how the Lord led him out of gaol, and he said: “Tell these things to Jacob and to the brothers.” Then he went outside and went to another place.

18 Íre aure túle, ua enge pitya valme imíca i ohtari, pa mana nanwave náne martienwa Péteren. 19 Herol se-cestane, ar íre uas hirne se, cannes i mo tulyumne i ohtari oa paimen. Ar lendes undu Yúreallo Césareanna ar lemne tasse. 
	20 Sámes túra rúşe i lienna mi Tír ar Síron. Ve er túlelte senna, ar carampelte as Vlasto, i turco i caimaşambo i aranwa, ar ñenter penastarya. Tá arcanelte raine, an nórelta camne mattarya ho ta i aranwa. 21 Mal sátina auresse Herol tumpexe arna larmanen ar hamune i sondasse namiéva ar carampe téna. 22 Tá i lie yáme: “Aino óma, ar lá atano!” 23 Mí imya lú i Héruo vala pente se, pan uas antane i alcar Erun. Anes mátina lo leucali ar effirne.

18 When morning came, there was no little exitement among the soldiers, about what really had happened to Peter. 19 Herod sought him, and when he did not find him, he commanded that one was to lead the soldiers away for punishment. And he went down from Judea to Caesarea and remained there.
	20 He had great wrath against the people of [lit. in] Tyre and Sidon. As one they came to him, and they spoke with Blastus, the chief of the bedchamber of the king, and gained his support. Thereafter they asked for peace, for their land received its food from that of the king. 21 But on a set day Herod covered himself with a royal garment and sat down on the seat of judgement and talked to them. 22 Then the people cried: “A god's voice, and not [that] of a man!” 23 In the same moment the Lord's angel struck him, since he did not give the glory to God. He was eaten by worms and expired.

	24 Mal i Heruo quetta alle ar vintane. 25 Varnavas ar Saul nanwenner Yerúsalemenna apa telyanette núromolietta, ar tallette Yóhano, ye sáme i epesse Marco.

	24 But the Lord's word grew and spread. 25 Barnabas and Saul returned to Jerusalem after they completed their service, and they brought John, who had the nickname Mark. 

RANTA 13 
Enger Antiocesse Erutercánoli ar *peantalli i ocombesse ya enge tasse, Varnavas ar Símeon ye náne estaina Niher, ar Lucio Cirenello, ar Manaen ye náne peantana as Herol i *canastatur, ar Saul. 2 Lan cáranelte núromolie i Herun ar hépaner lamate, i Aire Fea quente: “Ánin sate Varnavas ar Saul, i molien yanna yaldenyet.” 3 Tá hempelte lamate ar hyamner ar panyaner máltat tunna ar láver tun lelya.

CHAPTER 13
[There] were in Antioch some prophets and teachers [*peantar-li > peantalli] in the congregation that was there, Barnabas and Simeon who was called Niger, and Lucius from Cyrene, and Manaen who was instructed [or, educated] with Herod the farthing-ruler, and Saul. 2 While they were doing service for the Lord and were fasting, the Holy Spirit said: “Set apart for me Barnabas and Saul, for the work to which I called them.” 3 Then they kept a fast and prayed and put their hands [dual] upon them [dual] and let them [dual] go.

4 Etta neri sine, mentane lo i Aire Fea, ununter mir Seleucia, ar talo cirnette oa Ciprusenna. 5 Ar íre túlette mir Salamis carnette Eruo quetta sinwa i Yúraron *yomencoassen. Yú sámette Yoháno asette, restala tun.
	6 Íre lendelte ter i quanda tol tenna Pafos, veldelte nér ye náne sairon, furutercáno. 7 Enges   as Serhio Paulo, i nórecáno, ye náne handa nér. Apa yaldes Varnavas yo Saul insenna, nér sina cestane hlare Eruo quetta. 8 Mal Elimas i sairon – an ta ná ya esserya tea – tarne tunna, cestala quere i nórecáno oa i saviello. 9 Saul, ye yú Paulo ná, náne quátina Aire Feanen, yente se 10 ar quente: “A nér quanta ilya nostaleo furuo ar ilya olca cardo, a yondo i Arauco, a ñotto ilyo ya faila ná, ma ual pustuva rice i Heruo tére maller? 

4 Therefore these men, sent by the Holy Spirit, went down into Seleucia, and from there they [dual] sailed away to Cyprus. 5 And when they [dual] came into Salamis they made God's word known in the synagogues of the Jews. They also had John with them [dual], helping them [dual].
	6 When they [plural] went through the entire island as far as Paphos, they met a man who was a wizard, a false prophet [furutercáno: lie-herald]. 7 He was with Sergius Paulus, the governor, who was an intelligent man. After he called Barnabas and Saul to himself, this man sought to hear God's word. 8 But Elymas the wizard – for that is what his name means – stood against them [dual], seeking to turn the governor away from the faith. 9 Saul, who is also Paul [Paulus/Paulo], was filled with Holy Spirit, looked at him 10 and said: “O man full of every kind of lie and of every wicked deed, o son of the Devil, o enemy of all that is just, will you not stop twisting the straight roads of the Lord?

11 Ar sí, yé, i Héruo má ná lyenna, ar nauval laceníte, lá cenila i áre ter lúme.” Mí imya lú híşie ar mornie lantaner senna, ar lendes cestala ennoli tulyáven se i mánen. 12 Tá i nórecáno, íre cennes ya martiéla né, sáve; ar tatallanes i Heruo peantávenen.
	13 I neri i enger as Paulo sí lender ciryanen Pafosello ar túler Peryanna Pamfiliasse. Mal Yoháno hehtane te ar nanwenne Yerúsalemenna. 14 Ono tú, apa oantette Peryallo, túler Antiocenna Pisiriasse. Lendette mir i *yomencoa i *sendaresse ar hamunet. 15 Apa i et-hentie i Şanyeva ar i Erutercánoiva, i *yomencoanturi mentaner túna, quetila: “Neri, hánor, qui samiste quetta tiutaléva i lien, ása nyare!”

11 And now, behold, the Lord's hand is upon you, and you will be blind, not seeing the sunlight for a time.” In the same moment mist and darkness fell upon him, and he went seeking people to lead him by the hand. 12 Then the governor, when he saw what was happend, believed; and he marveled at [-nen] the Lord's teaching.
	13 The men that were with Paul now went by ship from Paphos and came to Perga in Pamphylia. But John abandoned them and returned to Jerusalem. 14 But they [dual], after they went away from Perga, came to Antioch in Pisidia. They went into the synagogue on the sabbath and sat down. 15 After the reading out of the Law and of the Prophets, the synagogue chiefs sent to them, saying: “Men, brothers, if you have a word of comfort for the people, tell it!”

	16 Ar Paulo oronte, ar carila hwerme máryanen quentes: “Neri, Israelyar ar elde i rucir Erullo, á lasta! 17 Israel liendelvo Aino cilde atarilvar ar carne lielva túra lan máranelte ve aianor Mirrandoresse; tá taura rancunen te-tulyanes et talo, 18 ar ter loar *os *canaquean antanes tien matta i ravandasse. 19 Apa nancarnes lier quean mi Canáan, tyarneset harya nórelta 20 loain *os *lepenquean ar tuxar canta. Epeta antanes tien námoli, tenna Sámuel i Erutercáno. 21 Tá arcanelte aran, ar Eru antane tien Saul Císion, nér nosseo Venyamíno. Apa loar *canaquean 22 panyanes hé oa ar ortane Lávir yondorya Yesse náven aran, pa ye yú quentes ve *vettie: Ihírien Lávir yondorya Yesse nér ve endanya, ye caruva quanda indómenya. 23 Nér sino erdello, Eru vandaryanen mentane *Rehtando Israelenna, Yésus, 24 apa Yoháno, nó tulierya, carne sumbie inwisteva sinwa i quanda lien Israélo. 25 Mal íre Yoháno ron telyumne normerya, quentes: Man intyalde i nanye? Uan sé. Mal yé, apa ni túla quén yeva hyapat inye ua valda lehtien!

	16 And Paul arose, and making a gesture with his hand he said: “Men, Israelites and you who fear God, listen! 17 The God of our people Israel chose our fathers and made our people great while they were dwelling as foreigners in Egypt; then with a mighty arm he led them out from there, 18 and through[out] forty years he gave them food in the wilderness. 19 After he destroyed ten peoples in Canaan, he caused them to possess their land 20 for about four hundred and fifty years. Thereafter he gave them judges, until Samuel the Prophet. 21 Then they requested a king, and God gave them Saul son of Kish, a man of the tribe of Benjamin. After forty years 22 he put him away and raised up David son of Jesse to be king, about whom he also said as a witness: I have found David son of Jesse a man according to my heart, who will do my entire will. 23 From this man's seed, God by his promise sent a Savior to Israel, Jesus, 24 after John, before his coming, made baptism of repentance known to the entire people of Israel. 25 But when John was soon going to complete his run, he said: Who do you suppose that I am? I am not he. But behold, after me comes a person whose shoes [dual] I am not worthy to loosen!

	26 Neri, hánor, yondor nosseo Avrahámo ar i queni mici le i rucir Erullo: Elmenna i quetta rehtie sino anaie mentana. 27 An i marir Yerúsalemesse ar turcoltar uar sinte quén sina, mal íre namneltes carnelte nanwe i Erutercánoron quetier, yar nar et-hentaine ilya *sendaresse, 28 ar ómu ualte hirne casta qualmeo, arcanelte Pilátollo i mo nahtumne se. 29 Apa telyanelte ilye i nati técíne pa se, nampeltes undu i aldallo ar panyaner se noirisse. 30 Mal Eru ortane se et qualinallon, 31 ar ter rimbe réli anes cénaina lo i náner méniéla óse Alileallo Yerúsalemenna, i nar sí astarmoryar i lien.

	26 Men, brothers, sons of the kin of Abraham and the people among you that fear God: To you the word of this salvation has been sent. 27 For [those] that dwell in Jerusalem and their rulers did not know this person, but when they judged him they made true the sayings of the Prophets, which are being read aloud on every sabbath, 28 and though they did not find [any] cause of death, they requested from Pilate that one was to kill him. 29 After they completed all the things written about him, they took him down from the tree and put him in a grave. 30 But God raised him out of [the] dead, 31 and through[out] many days he was being seen by those that had gone with him from Galilee to Jerusalem, that are now his witnesses to the people.

32 Ar elme carir sinwa len i evandilyon pa i vanda antana i atarin: 33 in Eru acárie sa nanwa elven, hínaltar, enortavénen Yésus, ve yú técina ná i attea airelíresse: Tyé yondonya ná, ónen tye síra. 34 I se-enortanes et qualinallon, ar in uas nanwenuva quelexima sómanna, equéties sie: Antauvan len Láviro oravier, i vorondar. 35 Etta yú quetis hyana airelíresse: Ual lavuva vorondalyan cene quelexima sóma. 36 An Lávir, apa anes núro Eruo nirmen véra *nónareryasse, qualle ar náne panyana as ataryar ar cenne quelexima sóma. 37 Mal ye Eru ortane ua cenne quelexima sóma. 38 Etta alde ista – neri, hánor – i ter nér sina i apsenie úcariva ná len carna sinwa. 39 Ar i cáma yallo lá ence len náve leryane Móseo Şanyenen – pa ta aiquen ye save ná quétina pen cáma. 

32 For we [excl.] make known to you the gospel about the promise given to the fathers: 33 that God has made it real to us [incl.], their children, by resurrecting Jesus, as is also written in the second psalm: You are my son, I begat you today. 34 That he resurrected him out of [the] dead, and that he will not return to a corrupt state, he has said [= expressed] thus: I will give to you David's mercies, the faithful ones. 35 Therefore he also says in another psalm: You will not allow your faithful one to see a corrupt state. 36 For David, after he was a servant to God's will in his own generation, died and as put [or, lain] with his fathers and saw a corrupt state. 37 But [he] whom God raised did not see a corrupt state. 38 Therefore you are to know – men, brothers – that through this man the forgiveness of sins is made known to you. 39 For the guilt from which it was not possible for you to be freed by the Law of Moses – concerning that anyone who believes is said [to be] without guilt [or: is pronounced guiltless]. 

40 Etta cena i ya ná quétina i Erutercánossen ua tuluva lenna: 41 Á yéta, elde i quetir yaiwe, ar na quátine elmendanen, an carin carie réldassen – carie ya laume savuvalde yando qui aiquen nyare len pa sa!”
	42 Autala, i queni arcaner hlare amba pa nattor sine i hilyala *sendaresse. 43 Etta, apa i queni i náner ocómienwe vintaner, rimbali imíca i Yúrar ar i quérinar i runcer Erullo hilyaner Paulo yo Varnavas, yet quentet téna ar te-hortanet lemya mi Eruo lisse.
	44 I hilyala *sendaresse harive i quanda osto ocomne hlarien i Heruo quetta. 45 Íre i Yúrar cenner i şangar, anelte quátine *hrucennen, ar naiquetiénen quentelte ana i nati quétine lo Paulo.

40 Therefore see that [that] which is said in the Prophets will not come upon you: 41 Look, you who speak mockery, and be filled with wonder, for I do a work in your days – a work that you will by no means believe even if anyone tells you about it!”
	42 [When] leaving, the people asked to hear more about these matters on the following day of rest. 43 Therefore, after the people that were assembled scattered, numerous ones among the Jews and the converts that feared God followed Paul and Barnabas, who spoke to them and urged them to remain in God's grace.
	44 On the following day of rest nearly the entire city assembled to hear the word of the Lord. 45 When the Jews saw the crowds, they were filled with envy, and with blasphemy they spoke against the things said by Paul.

46 Tá, carpala veriénen, Paulo yo Varnavas quentet: “Elden mauyane minyave quete Eruo quetta. Pan nirildes oa ar uar note inde valde oira coivien, yé! querimme immet Úyúrannar. 47 An sie i Héru acánie ment: Apánien lye ve cala nórion, náveldan rehtie i anhaira rantanna cemeno.”
	48 Íre i queni i nórion hlasser ta, sámelte alasse ar laitaner Eruo quetta, ar illi i náner martyane oira coivien sáver. 49 Ente, i Heruo quetta náne cólina ter i quanda nórie. 50 Mal i Yúrar valtaner i *ainocimye nissi ar i minde neri i ostosse, ar ortanelte roitie ana Paulo yo Varnavas ar hanter tu rénaltar pella. 51 Pallette i asto taluttalto ar lendet Iconiumenna. 52 Ar i hildor náner quátine alassenen ar Aire Feanen.

46 Then, talking with boldness, Paul and Barnabas said: “To you it was necessary to first speak God's word. Since you push it away and do not count yourselves worthy for eternal life, behold! we turn [Q: turn ourselves] to non-Jews. 47 For so the Lord has commanded us: I have put you like a light of nations, for you to be salvation to the remotest part of earth.” 
	48 When the people of the nations heard that, they had joy and praised God's word, and all that were destined for eternal life believed. 49 Furthermore, the Lord's word was carried through the entire country. 50 But the Jews stirred up the reverent women and the prominent men in the city, and they raised up persecution against Paul and Barnabas and threw them beyond their borders. 51 They [dual] shook the dust from their feet [dual] and went to Iconium. 52 And the disciples were filled with joy and Holy Spirit.

RANTA 14 
Sí Iconiumesse lendette uo mir i *yomencoa, ar quentette mi lé tyarila hoa liyúme save, Yúrali ar Hellenyali véla. 2 Mal i Yúrar i uar sáve valtaner i Úyúrar ar carner te cotye i hánonnar. 3 Ananta, andave, quentette veriénen túrenen i Héruo, ye *vettane i quettan lisseryo, laviénen tanwalin ar tannalin marta ter máttat. 
	4 Mal i liyúme i ostosse náne şanca, ar ennoli náner i Yúrain ar exeli i apostelin. 5 Enge  amortie Úyúraron ar i Yúraron véla, as turiltar, nucumien tu ar nahtien tu sarninen. 6 Íre túnettes, úşette i ostonnar mi Licaonia, Listra ar Lerve ar i nórie pelila ta. 7 Ar tasse carnette i evandilyon sinwa.

CHAPTER 14
Now in Iconium they [dual] went together into the synagogue, and they spoke in a manner causing a huge multitude to believe, Jews and Greeks alike. 2 But the Jews that did not believe stirred up the non-Jews and made them hostile against the brothers. 3 And yet, for a long time, they [dual = Paul and Barnabas] spoke with boldness by the power of the Lord, who witnessed to the word of his grace, by allowing signs and portents to happen through their [dual] hands.
	4 But the multitude in the city was split, and some people were for the Jews and some others for the apostles. 5 There was an uprising of non-Jews and the Jews alike, with their rulers, to humiliate them [dual] and to kill them with stones. 6 When they [dual] perceived it, they fled to the cities in Lycaonia, Lystra and Derbe and the country surrounding it. 7 And there they [dual] made the gospel known.

	8 Ar Listrasse enge nér hamila ye ua polde tare talyatse. Anes *lalevíte amilleryo mónallo ar úne oi vantiéla. 9 Nér sina lastane Paulonna íre carampes, ar íre Paulo yente se ar cenne i sámes i savie náven nestana, 10 quentes senna taura ómanen: “Tara ama talulyatse, téra!” Ar campes ama ar vantane. 11 Ar i şangar, íre cennelte ya Paulo cáriéla né, ortaner ómalta, quetila Licaonio lambesse:  “I ainor olólier atani ar utúlier undu venna!” 12 Ar estanelte Varnavas Seus, mal Paulo Hermes, pan isse náne ye quente tún. 13 Ar i *airimo Seuso, yeo corda náne epe i osto, talle mondor ar riendi i andonnar ar merne *yace as i şangar.
	14 Mal íre i aposteli Varnavas yo Paulo hlasset pa ta, narcanette collattar ar campet mir i şanga, yamila 15 ar quetila: “Neri, mana castalda carien nati sine? Yú emme nát atani i perperir i imye nati yar elde perperir, ar carimme i evandilyon sinwa len, merila i queruvalde inde oa sine luste natillon i coirea Ainonna, ye ontane menel ar cemen ar ear ar ilye i nati mi tai. 

	8 And in Lystra [there] was a man sitting who could not stand on his feet. He was lame from his mother's womb and had not ever walked. 9 This man listened to Paul when he talked, and when Paul looked at him and saw that he had the faith to be healed, 10 he spoke to him with a mighty voice: “Stand up on your feet, straight!” And he jumped up and walked. 11 And the crowds, when they saw what Paul had done, raised their voices, saying in the tongue of Lycaonia: “The gods have become men and have come down to us!” 12 And they called Barnabas Zeus, but Paul Hermes, since he was [the one] who spoke for them [dual]. 13 And the priest of Zeus, whose temple was before the city, brought oxen and garlands to the gates and wanted to sacrifice with the crowds.
	14 But when the apostles Barnabas and Paul heard about that, they rent their cloaks and jumped into the crowd, crying 15 and saying: “Men, what is your reason for doing these things? Also we [dual] are men that suffer the same things that you suffer, and we [dual] make the gospel known to you, wishing that you will turn yourselves away from these empty things to the living God, who created heaven and earth and sea and all the things in them.

16 I vanwe *nónaressen láves ilye i nórin lelya vére tieltassen, ómu uas láve insen pene *vettie pa carierya márie, antala len ulo menello ar yáve i vanima lúmesse, quantala endalda mattanen ar alassenen.” 18 Ar quetila sie pustanette – ómu urdiénen – i şangar *yaciello tun.
	19 Mal túler Yúrali ho Antioc ar Iconium ar quenter i şangannar ar vistaner sámalta, ar hantelte sarni Paulonna ar tuncer se et i ostollo, intyala i náse qualina. 20 Mal íre i hildor pelder se, orontes ar menne mir i osto. Ar i hilyala auresse oantes as Varnavas, lelyala Lervenna. 21 Ar apa carnette sinwa i evandilyon osto tanan ar carnet fárea nóte hildolion, nanwennette ana Listra ar Iconium ar Antioc.

16 In the past generations he allowed all the nations to go their own ways, though he did not let himself lack witness about his doing good, giving them rain from heaven and fruit in the proper time, filling their heart with food and joy.” 18 And speaking so they [dual] stopped – though with difficulty – the crowds from sacrificing to them [dual].
	19 But [there] came some Jews from Antioch and Iconium and spoke to the crowds and changed their mind, and they threw stones at Paul and drew him out of the city, supposing that he was [Q: is] dead. 20 But when the disciples surrounded him, he arose and went into the city. And on the following day he went away with Barnabas, going to Derbe. 21 And after they made known the gospel to that city and made a quite large [lit. 'sufficient'] number of disciples, they returned to Lystra and Iconium and Antioch.

22 Turyanette i hildoron fear, hortala te lemya i saviesse quetiénen: “Mauya men mene mir Eruo aranie ter rimbe şangiéli.” 23 Ente, santette amyárali tien ilya ocombesse, ar hyamiénen ar lamatenen antanettet manna i Heruo yesse sávelte.
	24 Ar lendette ter Pisiria ar túlet mir Pamfilia, 25 ar apa quentette i quetta Peryasse, lendette undu Attalianna. 26 Ar talo cirnette oa Antiocenna, yasse nóvo Eruo lisse náne panyana hepiettasse i molien ya sí anelta telyaniéla.
	27 Apa túlette tar ar comyanet i ocombe, nyarnette pa ilye i nati yar Eru nne cáriéla ter tú, ar in aláties i Úyúrain i fenna saviéva. 28 Tá lemnette lá şinta lúmesse as i hildor.

22 They strengthened the souls of the disciples, urging them to remain in the faith by saying: “It is necessary for us to go into God's kingdom through many tribulations.” 23 Furthermore, they [dual] appointed for them elders in every congregation, and by praying and fasting they [dual] gave them into [the] hand of the Lord in whom they [pl.] believed.
	24 And they [dual] went through Pisidia and came into Pamphylia, 25 and after they spoke the word in Perga, they went down to Attalia. 26 And from there they [dual] sailed away to Antioch, where beforehand God's grace was put in their [dual] care for the work they had now completed.
	27 After they [dual] came there and gathered the congregation, they [dual] told them [plural] about all the things that God had done through them [dual], and that he had [Q: has] opened to the non-Jews the door of faith. 28 Then they [dual] remained for not a short time with the disciples. 

RANTA 15 
Ar nelli túler undu Yúreallo ar peantane i hánor: “Qui ualde *oscírine, Móseo haimenen, lá ece len ñete rehtie.” 2 Mal apa lá pitya cos ar costie mici té ar Paulo yo Varnavas, *partanelte i Paulo yo Varnavas ar exeli ho té menumner ama i apostelinnar ar amyárannar Yerúsalemesse pa cos sina.
	3 Etta té, mentane lo i ocombe, lender ter Foinicia ar Samária, nyarila manen Úyúrar querner inte, ar tallelte túra alasse i hánoin. 4 Íre túlelte Yerúsalemenna anelte cámine lo i ocombe ar i aposteli ar i amyáre neri, ar nyarnelte pa ilye i nati yar Eru carne ténen. 5 Ananta ennoli i herenello i Farisaron i sáver, oronter sondaltallon ar quenter: “Mauya *osciritat ar cane tien himya Móseo şanye.”

CHAPTER 15
And some men came down from Judea and taught the brothers: “If you are not circumcised, by the tradition [haime, habit] of Moses, it is not possible for you to obtain salvation.” 2 But after no small strife and quarreling among them and Paul and Barnabas, they arranged that Paul and Barnabas and some others from them were going to go up to the apostles and elders in Jerusalem concerning this dispute.
	3 Therefore they, sent by the congregation, went through Phoenicia and Samaria, telling how some non-Jews were converted [lit. turned themselves], and they brought great joy to the brothers. 4 When they came to Jerusalem they were received by the congregation and the apostles and the elder men, and they told about all the things that God did by them. 5 And yet some persons from the  order of the Pharisees that believed, arose from their seats and said: “It is necessary to circumcize them and command them to keep the law of Moses.”

	6 Ar i aposteli ar i amyárar ocomner carien úvie pa natto sina. 7 Apa olya cos Péter oronte ar quente téna: “Neri, hánor, istalde i ho i minye auri Eruo cilme náne i ter ninya anto i nóri hlarumner i quetta i evandilyono, savieltan. 8 Sie Eru, ye ista i endar, *vettane tien antavénen tien i Aire Fea, ve yú carnes elven. 9 Mi munta lenganes ven ar tien mi *alavéla lé, apa poitie endalta saviénen. 10 Etta, sí mana castalda tyastien Eru, paniénen sine hildoron axesse yalta ya ua ence elven ar atarilvain véla cole? 11 Úsie, savilve i nauvalve rehtane i Heru Yésuo lissenen, ve yú queni sine savir.”

	6 And the apostles and the elders assembled to make a consideration about this matter. 7 After much dispute Peter arose and said to them: “Men, brothers, you know that from the first days God's choice was that through my mouth the nations were going to hear the word of the gospel, for them to believe. 8 Thus God, who knows the hearts, witnessed to them by giving them the Holy Spirit, as he also did to us. 9 In nothing did he behave towards us and them in a different manner, after cleansing their heart by faith. 10 Therefore, now what is your reason for testing God, by putting on the neck of these disciples a yoke that it was not possible to us and to our fathers alike to bear? 11 On the contrary, we believe that we will be saved by the grace of the Lord Jesus, as also these people believe.

	12 Ar i quanda liyúme náne carna quilda, ar lastanelte Varnavas yo Paulonna íre nyarnette pa ilye i tannar ar tanwar yar Eru náne cáriéla imíca i liendi ter tú. 13 Apa pustanette carpa, Yácov quente: “Neri, hánor, á lasta ninna! 14 Símeon anyárie manen Eru minyave cimne i liendi mapáven et tailo lie esseryan. 15 Ar i Erutercánoron quettar quetir i imya nat, ve técina ná: 16 'Apa nati sine nanwenuvan ar encarastuvan Láviro lantienwa cauma, ar encarastuvan atalantie rantaryar ar ortauvan sa ata, 17 tyarila i lemyar imíca i atani cesta i Héru, as ennoli ho ilye i liendi,' quete i Héru ye cára nati sine, 18 sinwe et yalúmello. 19 Etta námienya ná i ávalve tyare urdie i quenin i nórellon i querir inte Erunna, 20 mal i tecuvalve téna i mauya tien hepe inte oa ho cordoni ar *hrupuhtie ar yallo quórina ná, ar sercello. 21 An enwine lúmellon Móses asámie ilye ostossen ennoli i carir se sinwa, pan náse et-hentaina i *yomencoassen ilya *sendaresse.” 

	12 And the entire multitude was made silent, and they listened to Barnabas and Paul when they [dual] told about all the signs and portents that God had done among the nations through them [dual]. 13 After they stopped talking, Jacob said: “Men, brothers listen to me! 14 Symeon has told how God first gave heed to the nations to take out of them a people for his name. 15 And the words of the prophets say the same thing, as is written: 16 'After these things I will return and I will rebuild David's fallen shelter, and I will rebuild its ruinous parts and I will raise it agan, 17 causing [those] that remained among the men to seek the Lord, with people from all the nations,' says the Lord who is doing these things, 18 known from of old. 19 Therefore my judgment is that we are not to cause difficulty to the people from the nations that turn themselves to God, 20 but that we will write to them that it is necessary for them to keep themselves away from idols and fornication and from what is strangled, and from blood. 21 For from ancient times Moses has had in all cities people that make him known, since he is read out in the synagogies on every day of rest.”

	22 Tá nemne mai i apostelin ar i amyárain ar i quanda ocomben menta cíline nelli ho té Antiocenna as Paulo yo Varnavas: Yúras ye náne estaina Varsappas, ar Sílas, minde neri imíca i hánor, 23 ar máltanen tencelte:  
	“I aposteli ar i amyárar, hánolyar, i hánoin i ear mi Antioc ar Siria ar Cilicia, té i nar i liendion: Hara máriesse! 24 Pan ahlárielme in ennoli ho mici mé atyárier len urdie quettaltainen, nevila nuquere fealda ómu ualme ánie tien peantávi, 25 er sámanen acárielme i cilme i mentauvalme nelli lenna as meldalmar, Varnavas yo Paulo, 26 neri i apánier coivietta raxesse, Herulva Yésus Hristo essen. 27 Etta mentalme Yúras ar Sílas, nyarien i imye nati quettanen. 28 An nemne mai i Aire Fean ar elmen lá napane hyana cólo lenna hequa nati sine yar mauyar: 29 Hepa inde oa ho nati *yácine cordonin, ar sercello, ar quórine celvallon, ar *hrupuhtiello. Qui hepildexer oa sine natillon, caruvalde mai. Mále len!”

	22 Then it seemed well to the apostles and the elders and to the whole congregation to send some chosen men from them to Antioch with Paul and Barnabas: Judas who was called Barsabbas, and Silas, prominent men among the brothers, 23 and by their hand they wrote:
	“The apostles and the elders, your brothers, to the brothers that are in Antioch and Syria and Cilicia, they that are of the nations: Greetings! [lit. sit in happiness/goodness]. 24 Since we have heard that some people from among us have caused you difficulty with their words, trying to overturn your soul though we have not given them instructions, 25 we have with one mind made the choice that we will send some men to you with our dear ones, Barnabas and Paul, 26 men that have put their life in danger, for the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. 27 Therefore we send Judas and Silas, to tell you the same things by word. 28 For it seemed well to the Holy Spirit and to us not to put another burden upon you except these things that are necessary: 29 Keep yourselves away from things sacrificed to idols, and from blood, and from strangled animals, and from fornication. If you keep yourselves away from these things, you will do well. Health to you!”

	30 Sie, íre neri sine náner mentaine, lendelte undu Antiocenna, ar comyanelte i liyúme ar antaner téna i menta. 31 Ar apa hentaneltes, sámelte alasse i hortalénen. 32 Ar Yúras ar Sílas, pan yú tú nánet Erutercánor, hortaner i hánor rimbe quettalínen ar turyaner te. 33 Apa marie tasse ter lúme, anelte lehtane lo i hánor nan innar mentaner te. 34 Ono Sílas sanne i náne mára sen lemya tasse. 35 Mal Paulo yo Varnavas termarnet mi Antioc, yasse tú ar rimbe exeli carner sinwa i evandilyon pa i Heruo quetta.

	30 Thus, when these men were being sent, they went down to Antioch, and they gathered the multitude and gave them the letter. 31 And after they read it, they had joy by the encouragement [hortale: urging]. 32 And Judas and Silas, since also they [dual] were prophets, urged the brothers with many words and strengthened them. 33 After dwelling there for [lit. though] a time, they were released by the brothers back to [those] that sent them. 34 But Silas thought it was good for him to tarry there. 35 But Paul and Barnabas remained in Antioch, where they [dual] and numerous others made known the gospel about the Lord's word.

	36 Apa réli Paulo quente Varnavanna: “Angwe nanwene ar cene i hánonnar ilya ostosse yasse carnengwe sinwa i Heruo quetta, cenien manen cáralte.” 27 Mal Varnavas merne tala as inse yú Yoháno, ye náne estaina Marco. 38 Mal Paulo ua sanne i náne mára tala i nér ye tu-hehtane Pamfiliasse ar ua lende asette i molienna. 39 I rúşe imbe tu náne ta aica i tyarneset hehta quén i exe, ar Varnavas nampe Marco ar cirne oa Ciprusenna.  40 Paulo cilde Sílas ar lende oa apa i Heruo lisse náne panyana hepieryasse lo i hánor. 41 Lendes ter Siria ar Cilicia, turyala i ocombi.

	36 After some days Paul said to Barnabas: “Let us [dual] return and see to the brothers in every city in which we [dual] made known God's word, to see how they are doing.” 27 But Barnabas wished to bring with himself also John, who was called Mark. 38 But Paul did not think it was good to bring the men who abandoned them [dual] in Pamphylia and did not go with them [dual] to the work. 39 The anger between them was so sharp that it caused them to abandon one another, and Barnabas took Mark and sailed away to Cyprus. 40 Paul chose Silas [as a companion] and went away after the Lord's grace was put in his keeping by the brothers. 41 He went through Syria and Cilicia, strengthening the congregations.

RANTA 16 
Tá túles Lervenna ar yú Listranna. Ar yé! enge tasse hildo yeo esse náne Timoşeo, i yondo savila Yúra nisso, mal Hellenya ataro. 2 Pa sé ilye i hánor mi Listra ar Iconium caramper mai. 3 Paulo merne i tulumnes óse, ar nampeses ar *oscirne se, castanen i Yúraron i enger tane ménassen, an illi sinter i atarya náne Hellenya. 4 Mal íre lendette ter i ostor, cannette tien hepe i namnar tulcane lo i aposteli ar amyárar i enger Yerúsalemesse. 5 Sie i ocombi náner turyaine i saviesse ar oronter nótesse aurello aurenna.
	6 Ente, lendette ter Frihia ar i Alátia-nórie, pan i Aire Fea váquente quete i quetta Asiasse, 7 mal íre túlette Misianna, névette lelya Vitinianna, mal Yésuo faire ua láve tun.

CHAPTER 16
Then he came to Derbe and also to Lystra. And behold! [there] was there a disciple whose name was Timothy, the son of a believing Jewish woman, but of a Greek father. 2 Of him all the brotehrs in Lystra and Iconium spoke well. 3 Paul wished that he would come with him, and he took and circumsized him, by reason of the Jews that were in those regions, for all knew that his father was Greek. 4 But when they [dual] went through the cities, they commanded them to keep the statutes fixed by the apostles and elders that were in Jerusalem. 5 Thus the congregations were being strengthened in the faith and rose in number from day to day.
	6 Furthermore, they [dual] went through Phrygia and the country of Galatia, since the Holy Spirit forbade to speak the word in Asia, 7 but when they [dual] came to Mysia, they tried to go to Bithynia, but Jesus' spirit did not allow them [dual].

8 Apa lendette ter Misia túlette undu Troasenna. 9 Ar i lómisse Paulo camne maur: Nér Maceroniallo tarne arcala sello, quetila: “Tula olla mir Maceronia ar áme manya!” 10 Apa cennes i maur, cestanelme lelya Maceronianna, intyala in Eru tultane me carien i evandilyon sinwa tien.
	11 Etta cirnelme Troasello ar lender térave Samoşrácenna, mal i hilyala auresse ana Neapolis 12 ar talo Filippinna, vinyamar, ya ná i amminda osto Maceronia·ménasse. Hautanelme osto sinasse, lemyala ter réli. 13 Ar i *sendaresse lendelme ettenna ter i ando, nómenna ara síre ya sannelme náne nóme hyamiéva, ar hamunelme ar caramper i nissennar i náner ocómienwe. 14 Ar lastane nís yeo esse náne Liria, macar *luicarne lanneo Şiatíra·ostollo ye *tyerne Eru, ar i Heru latyane endarya cimien i nati yar Paulo quétane. 15 Apa isse ar nosserya náner sumbane, quentes arcandesse: “Qui namilde ni voronda i Herun, tula mir coanya ar á lemya!” Ar me-mauyanes tule.

8 After they [dual] went through Mysia they came down to Troas. 9 And in the night Paul received a vision: A man from Macedonia stood requesting of him, saying: “Come over into Macedonia and help us!” 10 After he saw the vision, we sought to go to Macedonia, supposing that God summoned us to make the gospel known to them.
	11 Therefore we sailed from Troas and went straight to Samothrace, but on the following day to Neapolis 12 and from there to Philippi, a colony [vinyamar: new home], which is the most prominent city in the Macedonia region. We halted in this city, remaining for some days. 13 And on the day of rest we went outside though the gate, to a place beside a river which we thought was a place of prayer, and we sat down and talked to the women that were assembled. 14 And a woman whose name was Lydia, a trader in purple cloth from the city of Thyatira who worshipped God, listened, and the Lord opened her heart to give heed to the things that Paul spoke. 13 After she and his family were baptized, she said in entreaty: “If you judge me faithful to the Lord, come into my house and remain!” And she compelled us to come.

	16 Ar túle, íre ménanelme i nómenna hyamiéva, i me-velde inya mól arwa faireo apacenwa. Taldes heruryain olya telpe *yuhtiénen apacen. 17 Nís sina hilyane Paulo ar me, yamila quettar sine: “Neri sine nar Aino Antaro móli, ar carilte sinwa len i tie rehtiéva.” 18 Carnes sie rimbe aurelissen. Lumba, Paulo teldave quernexe ar quente i fairenna: “Canin lyen Yésus Hristo essenen: Tula et sello!” Ar hé ettúle i imya lúmesse. 

	16 And it came [to pass], when we were going to the place of prayer, that a female slave met us, having a spirit of foresight [/prophecy]. She brought her masters much money by using foresight. 17 This woman followed Paul and us, crying these words: “These men are slaves of God Most High, and they make known to you the path of salvation.” 18 She did so for many days. Weary, Paul finally turned [Q: turned himself] and said to the spirit: “I command you by the name of Jesus Christ: Come out of her!” And it came out in the same hour.

	19 Íre heruryar cenner in estelelta ñétiéva vanwa ná, nampelte Paulo yo Sílas ar tuncer tu i nómenna mancaléva, i ingwennar. 20 Tulyaneltet i námonnar ar quenter: “Neri sine tarcir ostolva, nála Yúrar, 21 ar caritte sinwe haimeli yar uar lávine ven ve Rómear came hya hilya.” 22 Ar i şanga oronte túna, ar i námor, apa narcanelte collattar tullo, canner i mo palpuva tu rundainen. 23 Apa antanelte tun rimbe taramboli, hanteltet mir mando, canila i mandocundon hepitat varnave. 24 Apa camnelte taite canwa, hanteset mir i ammitya mando ar tance taluttat i panonna.
	25 Mal *os i lómio ende Paulo yo Sílas hyámaner, laitala Eru lírírnen, ar i queni i mandosse lastaner tu. 26 Rincinen túra *cempalie martane, tyarila i mando talmar pale. Ente, mí imya lú ilye i fennar náner pantane, ar illion limili náner lehtane.

	19 When her masters saw that their hope of gain was [Q: is] gone, they seized Paul and Silas and dragged them [dual] to the place of commerce, to the rulers. 20 They brought them to the judges and said: “These men trouble our city, being Jewish, 21 and they [dual] make known customs that are not allowed for us as Romans to receive or follow.” 22 And the crowed arose against them [dual], and the judges, after the tore their cloaks from them [dual], commanded that one was to [Q: will] beat them with sticks [or, with clubs: rundainen]. 23 After they gave them [dual] many blows, they threw them into gaol, commanding the goalkeeper [mando-cundo] to keep them securely. 24 After they received such command, he threw them into the inmost gaol and fastened the their feet [dual] to the block [pano: beam]. 
	25 But around the midst of the night Paul and Silas were praying, praising God with song, and the people in the gaol listened to them. 26 Suddenly a great earthquake happened, causing the foundations of the gaol to shake. Furthermore, in the same moment all the doors were opened, and the chains of all were loosened.

27 I mandocundo, íre nánes eccoitana ar cenne i mando fennar pantane, tunce macilya ar nahtumne inse, intyala in ilquen i mandosse vanwa ná. 28 Mal Paulo yáme taura ómanen: “Áva harna imle, an nalme illi sisse!” 29 Ar arcanes calali ar campe minna, ar pálala lantanes undu epe Paulo ar Sílas. 30 Ar tulyanes tu ettenna ar quente: “Heruvi, mana mauya nin care ñetien rehtie?” 31 Quentette: “Sava i Heru Yésusse, ar nauval rehtana, elye ar onosselya.” 32 Ar quentette i Heruo quetta senna ar ilyannar i enger coaryasse. 33 Ar talleset óse yana lúmesse ar sóve rimpeltar, ar isse ar illi i enger óse náner sumbane pen hopie. 34 Ar talleset mir coarya ar panyane matta i sarnosse epe tu, ar sámes túra alasse as quanda nosserya, pan anes hi¨riéla savie Erusse.

27 The gaoler, when he was awakened and saw the doors of the prison opened, drew his sword and was going to kill himself, supposing that everyone in the gaol was [Q: is] gone. 28 But Paul cried with a mighty voice: “Do not harm yourself, for we are all here!” 29 And he asked for lights and jumped inside, and trembling he fell down before Paul and Silas. 30 And he led them [dual] outside and said: “Lords, what is necessary for me to do to obtain salvation?” 31 They [dual] said: “Believe in the Lord Jesus, and you will be saved, you and your family.” 32 And they [dual] spoke the Lord's word to him and to all that were in his house. 33 And he brought them with him in that hour and washed their stripes, and he and all that were with him were baptized without waiting. 34 And he brought them into his house and put food on the table before them [dual], and he had great joy with his entire familty, since he had found faith in God.

	35 Íre aure túle, i námor mentaner i rundacolindor quetien: “Á lehta neri tane!” 36 Ar i mandocundo nyarne quettar sine Paulon: “I námor ementayer nelli leryáven let! Etta, sí ettula ar á auta rainesse!” 37 Mal Paulo quente téna: “Rípelte met epe i lie pen námie, neri i nar Rómear, ar hantelte met mir mando – ar sí et-hátalte met nuldave? Laume! Lava tén tule ar tulya met ettenna!” 38 I rundacolindor nyarner quettar sine i námoin. Anelte ruhtane íre hlasselte i natte Rómear. 39 Etta túlelte ar carner arcande tun, ar apa talleltet ettenna, arcanelte i autumnette i ostollo. 40 Mal túlette et i mandollo ar lendet coaryanna Liria, ar íre cennette i hánor hortanettet. Tá oantette.

	35 When day came, the judges sent the club-bearers [or, constables] to say: “Release those men!” 36 And the gaoler told these words to Paul: “The judges have sent some men to release you [dual]! Therefore, now come out and go away in peace!” 37 But Paul said to them: “They flogged us [dual] before the people without judgement, men that are Romans, and they threw us [dual] into gaol – and now they are throwing us out secretly? By no means! Let them come and lead us [dual] outside!” 38 The club-bearers told these words to the judges. They [plural] were scared when they heard that they [dual] were [Q: are] Romans. 39 Therefore they [plural] came and made a petition to them [dual], and after they brought them outside, they [plural] asked that they [dual] would go away from the city. 40 But they [dual] came out from the prison and went to the house of Lydia, and when they [dual] saw the brothers they [dual] urged [/encouraged] them. Then they [dual] went away. 

RANTA 17 
Sí lendette ter Amfipolis ar Apollonia ar túlet Şessalonicanna, yasse enge Yúra *yomencoa. 2 Sie, haimeryanen, Paulo lende minna téna, ar *sendaressen nelde quentes aselte pa i Tehteler, 3 antala ten hande ar tanala i mauyane i Hriston perpere ar orta qualinallon, ar eques: “Si i Hristo ná, Yésus sina ye carin sinwa len.” 4 Etta ennoli mici te sáver ar himyaner Paulo ar Sílas, as hoa liyúme i Hellenyaron i *tyerner Eru, ar lá mancali i amminde nission.
	5 Mal i Yúrar náner quátaine *hrúcennen, ar apa comyanelte olce nelli i nómello mancaléva ar carner şanga, tyarnelte amortie i ostosse. Lantanelte coaryanna Yáson ar cestaner tala tu ettenna i lienna.

CHAPTER 17
Now they [dual] went through Amphipolis and Apollonia and came to Thessalonica, where [there] was a Jewish synagogue. 2 Thus, by his habit, Paul went in to them, and on three sabbaths he spoke with them about the Scriptures,3 giving them understanding and showing that it was necessary for the Christ to suffer and rise from [the] dead, and he said: “This is the Christ, this Jesus that I make known to you.” 4 Therefore some people among them believed and stuck to Paul and Silas, with a great multitude of the Greeks that served God, and not a few of the most prominent women.
	5 But the Jews were being filled with envy, and after they gathered some wicked men from the place of commerce and formed a crowd, they caused an uprising in the city. They fell upon the house of Jason and sought to bring them ouside to the people.

6 Íre ualte hirne tu tuncelte Yáson ar hánoli i turconnar i osto, yámala: “Queni sine i nuequérier ambar sí utúlier yú sir, 7 ar Yáson acámie te mir coarya! Ar ilye queni sine tarir ana i canwar i Ingaráno, an quetilte i ea hyana aran, Yésus.” 8 Valtanelte i şanga ar i osto turcor i hlasser nati sine, 9 ar apa mapie fárea varnasse ho Yáson ar i exi lehtaneltet.
	10 Pen hopie, lóme yanasse i hánor mentaner yúyo Paulo ar Sílas Veroianna, ar íre túlette tar, lendette mir i *yomencoa i Yúraron. 11 Té náner arte lá i marner Şessalonicasse, ar camnelte i quetta ilya mára nirmenen, ar ilya auresse cenşelte i Tehteler cenien qui nati sine náner sie. 12 Etta rimbali mici te sáver, ar sie carner lá nótime minde Hellenye nisseli, yú rimbe nelli.

6 When they did not find them they drew Jason and some brothers to the rulers of the city, crying: “These people that have turned the world upside down have now come here as well, 7 and Jason has received them into his house! And all these people stand against the commands of the Emperor, for they say that [there] is another king, Jesus.” 8 They stirred up the crowd and the rulers of the city  that heard these things, 9 and after taking sufficient security from Jason and the others they released them.
	10 Without waiting, in that night the brothers sent both Paul and Silas to Beroea, and when they [dual] came there, they went into the synagogue of the Jews. 11 They [pl.] were nobler than those that lived in Thessalonica, and they received the word with all good will, and every day they searched the Scriptures to see if these things were so. 12 Therefore numerous ones among them believed, and so did not a few prominent Greek women, also numerous men.

13 Mal íre i Yúrar Şessalonicallo parner in Eruo quetta cáraina sinwa ná yú Veroiasse lo Paulo, túlelte tar valtala ar tarcila i şangar. 14 Pen hopie i hánor mentaner Paulo oa, tenna i ear, mal Sílas ar Timoşeo véla lemner yasse engette. 15 Mal i tulyaner Paulo taller se tenna Aşen, ar nanwennelte talala canwarya Sílas ar Timoşeonna: Mauyane tun tule lintiettanen.
	16 Lan Paulo hópane tun mi Aşen, fairerya náne tarcina ceniénen manen i osto náne quanta cordonion. 17 Etta carampes i *yomencoasse as i Yúrar ar i exi i *tyerner Eru – yú i nómesse mancaléva, as i túler tar. 18 Mal ennoli imíca i *sailiendili, i Epicurear ar i Stoici véla, lender mir cos óse, ar ennoli mici te quenter: “Mana nyatila quén sina mere quete?” Exeli quenter: “Neme i cáras sinwe ettelie ainoli.” Ta náne pan carampes pa i evandilyon pa Yésus ar i enortave.

13 But when the Jews from Thessalonica learnt that God's word was [Q: is] being made known also in Beroea by Paul, they came there stirring up and disturbing the crowds. 14 Without waiting the brothers sent Paul away, as far as the sea, but Silas and Timothy alike remained were they [dual] were. 15 But [those] that led Paul brought him as far as Athens, and they returned bringing his command to Silas and Timothy: It was necessary for them [dual] to come as soon as they could [lit. to come with their speed].
	16 While Paul was waiting for them [dual] in Athens, his spirit was being disturned by seeing how the city was full of idols. 17 Therefore he talked in the synagoge with the Jews and the others that worshipped God – also in the place of commerce, with those that came there. 18 But some among the philosophers, the Epicureans and the Stoics alike, went into dispute with him, and some people among them said: “What does this idle-talking person want to say?” Others said: “It seems he is making known some foreign gods.” That was since he talked about the gospel about Jesus and the resurrection.

19 Etta nampeltes ar tulyane se mir i Areopahus, quetila: “Ma lertalme ista mana nás, peantáve sina ya quétal? 20 An talas noali yar nar ettelie hlarulmant. Etta merilme ista mana nati sine tear.” 21 An illi mi Aşen ar ilye i ettelear tasse satir ilya lerina lú carien munta hequa nyare hya hlare sinyar. 
	22 Paulo oronte endesse Areopahusso ar quente: “Neri Aşenello, tuntan i mi ilye nati samilde áya i ainoin túra lá ya exi samir. 23 An lan ménanen ter i osto, yétala i nati yar *tyerilde, hirnen yú *yangwa yasse náne técina: “Úsinwa ainon.” Etta, ya *tyerilde pen istie sa, ta inye cára sinwa len. 

19 Therefore they took him and led him into the Areopagus, saying: “May we know what it is, this teaching that you are speaking? 20 For you bring some ideas that are strange to our ears. Therefore we want to know what these things mean.” 21 For all in Athens and all the foreigners there set aside every free moment to do nothing except tell or hear news.
	22 Paul stood up in the middle of the Areopagus and said: “Men from Athens, I perceive that in all things you have an awe for the gods greater than what others have. 23 For while I was going through the city, looking at the things that you worship, I found also an alter on which it was written: “To an unknown god.” Therefore, [that] which you worship without knowing it, that I am making known to you.

24 I Aino ye carne i mar ar ilqua ya ea sasse ua mare cordassen cárine mainen. 25 Ente, uas *veuyaina atanion mainen, ve au samis maure erya natwa, isse immo antala illin coivie ar şúle ar ilye nati. 26 Ar carnes et er atanello ilya nóre ataniva, marieltan i quanda palúresse cemeno, ar santes i lúmi ar i rénar vehten atanion, 27 cestialtan Eru, qui ece tien rahta senna ar hiritas, ómu é uas haira ho erya quén mici vi. 28 An issenen samilve coivie ar levilve ar ealve, ve yando maitalli mici lé equétier: 'An nalve yú nosseryo.'
	29 Etta, cenila i nalve Eruo nosse, ualve care mai qui sanalve pa i Aino i náse ve malta hya telpe hya ondo, hya tanwe cátina atano curwenen hya sanwenen. 30 Nanwa, Eru tanne cóle mi lúmi sine yassen queni epénier istya, mal sí quetis i atannar ilya nómesse i mauya tien hire inwis. 31 An asáties ré yasse namuvas cemen failiesse nernen ye icílies, ar ánies ilye atanin varnasse ortavénen se et qualinallon.”
	 32 Mal íre hlasselte pa enortave qualinaiva, ennoli quenter yaiwe, íre exeli quenter: “Lye-hlaruvalme ata pa natto sina yú hyana lúmesse.” 33 Sie Paulo etelende et endeltallo, 34 mal ennoli himyaner se ar sáver. Mici té náne Lionisio ye náne námo mí Areopahus, ar nís estaina Lamaris, ar exeli ara tu.

24 The God who made the earth and everything that is in it does not dwell in temples made by hands. 25 Furthermore, he is not being served by men's hands, as if he has [any] need of a single thing, he himself giving to all life and breath and all things. 26 And he made out of one man every nation of men, for them to dwell on the entire surface of [the] earth, and he appointed the times and the borders for the dwelling [vehte, 'haunt'] of men, 27 for them to seek God, if they can reach towards him and find him, though indeed he is not far from a single person among us. 28 For by him we have life and we move and we exist, as also some poets [maitar-li > maitalli] among you have said: 'For we are also his kin.'
	29 Therefore, seeing that we are God's kin, we do not do well if we think about the Deity that he is like gold or silver or stone, or an artifact formed by man's art or thought. 30 True, God showed patience in these times when people have been lacking knowledge, but now he says to men in every place that it is necessary for them to find repentance. 31 For he has set a day in which he will judge earth in righteousness by a man that he has chosen, and he has given to all men security [of this] by raising him out of [the] dead.”
	32 But when they heard about resurrection of [the] dead, some among them spoke mockery, while others said: “We will hear you again about this matter another time.” 33 Thus Paul went out from their midst, 34 but some people stuck to him and believed. Among them were Dionysius who was a judge in the Areopagus, and a woman called Damaris, and some others beside them [dual].

RANTA 18 
Apa nati sine oantes ho Aşen ar túle Corintenna. 2 Ar hirnes Yúra estaina Aquila, nér nóna mi Pontus, ye şinta lúme yá náne tulinwa Italiallo as Priscilla verirya, pan Claurio canwanen ilye Yúrar oanter Rómallo. Ar túles túna, 3 ar pan sámelte i imya nostale moliéva, lemnes asette ar móle. An molielta náne care *lancoar. 4 Mal carampes i *yomencoasse ilya *sendaresse ar tyarne Yúrar ar Hellenyar save.  

CHAPTER 18
After these things he went away from Athens and came to Corinth. 2 And he found a Jew called Aquila, a man born in Pontus, who a short time ago had come from Italy with Priscilla his wife, since by the command of Claudius all Jews went away from Rome. And he came to them, 3 and since they had the same kind of work, he remained with them and laboured. For their work was to make tents. 4 But he talked in the synagogue every sabbath and caused Jews and Greeks to believe.

	5 Íre Sílas ar Timoşeo ununter Maceroniallo, Paulo aqua antanexe carien i Quetta sinwa, *vettala i Yúrain i Yésus ná i Hristo. 6 Mal íre tarnelte ana se ar quenter yaiwie, palles i asto larmaryallon ar quente téna: “Nai sercelda tuluva véra careldanna! Inye poica ná. Ho sí lelyan Úyúrannar.” 7 Ar léves talo ar lende mir i coa quenwa estaina Titio Yusto, ye *tyerne Eru. Coarya náne carastana mir i imya ataque yasse i *yomencoa enge. 8 Crispo i *yomencoantur camne i savie i Herusse as quanda nosserya, ar apa hlarie, rimbali imíca i queni Corinto sáver ar náner sumbane. 9 Ar mi maur i lómisse i Heru quente Paulonna: “Áva ruce, mal queta ar áva na quilda, 10 an ean aselye ar *úquen caruva lyen ulco, an samin rimbe ennoli osto sinasse.” 11 Ar termarnes tasse ter er loa ar astar enque, peantala mici te Eruo quetta. 

	5 When Silas and Timothy came down from Macedonia, Paul completely gave himself to making the Word known, witnessing to the Jews that Jesus was [Q; is] the Christ. 6 But when they stood against him and spoke mockery, he shook the dust from his garments and said to them: “May you blood come upon your own head! I am clean. From now I go to non-Jews.” 7 And he moved from there and went into the house of a person called Titius Justus, who worshipped God. His house was built into the same building where the synagogue was. 8 Crispus the synagogue ruler received the faith in the Lord with his entire family, and after hearing, numerous ones among the people of Corinth believed and were baptized. 9 And in a vision in the night the Lord said to Paul: “Do not fear, but speak and do not be silent, for I am with you and no one will do to you [any] evil, for I have numerous people in this city.” 11 And he remained there for one year and six months, teaching among them God's word.

	12 Sí íre Allio náne nóreturco Acaio, i Yúrar er sámanen oronter Paulonna ar tulyaner hé i námosondanna, 13 quetila: “Nér sina tyare atani save i mauya tien *tyere Eru mi lé ana i Şanye.” 14 Mal íre Paulo pantumne antorya, Allio quente i Yúrannar: “Au i natto náne pa ulco hya olca carda, sámen casta samien cóle aselde. 15 Mal qui i natto ná pa costiéli pa quettali ar esseli ar i Şanye ya samilde, mauya elden cene sanna. Inye ua mere náve námo pa nati sine.” 16 Ar éles te oa i námosondallo. 17 Ono illi mici te namper Sostenes i *yomencoantur ar palpaner se epe i námosonda. Mal Allio cimne munta sine nation.

	12 Now when Gallio was proconsul [nóreturco: nation-chief] of Achaia, the Jews with one mind arose against Paul and led him to the judgement seat, 13 saying: “This man causes men to believe it is necessary for them to worship God in a manner against the Law.” 14 But when Paul was going to open his mouth, Gallio said to the Jews: “If the matter were about [some] evil or a wicked deed, I had reason to have patience with you. 15 But if the matter is about quarrelings about some words and names and the Law that you have, it is necessary for you to see to it. I do not want to be judge concerning these things.” 16 And he drove them away from the judgement seat. 17 But all among them seized Sosthenes the synagogue ruler and beat him before the judgement seat. But Gallio gave heed to none of these things.

	18 Mal apa lemie tasse ter an rimbe réli, Paulo quente namárie i hánonnar ar cirne oa Sirianna, ar óse lendet Priscilla yo Aquila. Oantes apa cirie findelerya mi Cencreai, an sámes vanda. 19 Túlelte Efesusenna, ar tu-hehtanes tasse, mal isse lende mir i *yomencoa ar quente as i Yúrar. 20 Íre arcanelte senna lemya aselte an anda lúmesse, uas merne, 21 mal quentes namárie ar nyarne tien: “Nanwenuvan lenna ata, qui Eru mere.” Ar cirnes oa Efesusello ar túle undu Césareanna. Ar lendes ama ar *suilane i ocombe, ar ununte Antiocenna. 
	23 Ar apa marnes tasse ter lúme oantes ar lende nómello nómenna ter Alatia·nórie ar Frihia, tulcala i hildor.

	18 But after remaining there for many days more, Paul said farewell to the brothers and sailed away to Syria, and with him went Priscilla and Aquila. He went away after cutting his hair in Cencreai, for he had a pledge. 19 They [pl.] came to Ephesus, and he left them [dual] there, but he went into the synagogue and spoke with the Jews. 20 When they requested from him to stay with them for a longer time, he did not want to, 21 but said farewell and told them: “I will return to you again, if God wishes.” And he sailed away to Ephesus and came down to Caesarea. And he went up and greeted the congregation, and went down to Antioch.
	23 And after he dwelt there for [ter = through] a time he went away and travelled from place to place through the country of Alatia and Phrygia, strengthening the disciples.

	24 Sí túle Efesusenna Yúra yeo esse náne Apollo, nóna Alexandriasse. Sintes carpa mai ar náne taura i Tehtelessen. 25 Anes peantana mí Heruo tie, ar pan anes lúşina i fairenen, carampes ar peantanes ya nanwa náne pa Yésus, mal sintes rie Yoháno sumbie. 26 Ar nér sina *yestane quete canyave i *yomencoasse. Íre Priscilla yo Aquila hlasset se, nampettes asette ar tulyane se ambe tumna handenna i tieo Eruo. 27 Ente, pan mernes lelya mir Acaia, i hánor tencer i hildonnar, hortala i camumneltes mai. Sie, íre túles tar, ita manyanes i sáver i Erulissenen.  28 Ar veassenen tenges i Yúraron loima, tanala i Tehtelellon i Yésus ná i Hristo.

	24 Now [there] came to Ephesus a Jew whose name was Apollo, born in Alexandria. He knew [how] to talk well and was mighty in the Scriptures. 25 He was instructed in the Lord's way, and since he was glowing with the spirit, he talked and taught what was true concerning Jesus, be he knew only John's baptism. 26 And this man began to speak boldly in the synagogue. When Priscilla and Aquila heard him, they [dual] took him with them and led him to a deeper understanding of God's way. 27 Furthermore, since he wished to go into Achaia, the brothers wrote to the disciples, urging them to receive him well [lit. urging that they were going to receive him well]. Thus, when he came there, he greatly helped those who believed by the grace. 28 And with vigour he indicated the mistake of the Jews, showing from the scriptures that Jesus was [Q: is] the Christ.  

RANTA 19  
Íre Apollo enge Corintesse túle i Paulo lende ter i mitye nórier tenna Efesus. Ar hirnes hildoli 2 ar quente téna: “Ma camnelde Aire Fea íre sávelde?” Quentelte senna: “Laume ahlárielme in ea Aire Fea.” 3 Ar eques: “Mi mana, tá, anelde sumbane?” Hanquentelte: “Mi Yoháno sumbie.” 4 Eque Paulo: “Yoháno sumbane i sumbiénen inwisteva, hortala i lie save yesse tulumne apa se – ta ná, Yésusse.” 5 Íre hlasselte ta, anelte sumbane mi Yésus Hristo esse. 6 Ar íre Paulo panyane máryat tesse, i Aire Fea túle téna, ar quentelte lambelissen ar caramper ve Erutercánor. 7 Quanda nótelta náne *os neri yunque.
	8 Mittanes i *yomencoa ar quente canyave astassen nelde, carpala ar talala exeli handenna pa Eruo aranie. 9 Mal íre ennoli carner inte sarde ar uar sáve, quetila yaiwe pa i Tie epe i liyúme, te-hehtanes ar hyarne i hildor ho te, ilya auresse antala carpiéli mi Tiráno ataque. 10 Ta martane ter loa atta, ar sie illi i marner Asiasse hlasser Eruo quetta, Yúrar ar Hellenyar véla. 

CHAPTER 19
While Apollos was in Corinth it happened [lit. came] that Paul went through the inlands [lit. inside countries] as far as Ephesus. And he found some disciples 2 and said to them: “Did you receive Holy Spirit when you believed?” They said to him: “Indeed we have not [even] heard that [there] is a Holy Spirit.” 3 And he said: “In what, then, were you baptized?” They answered: “In the baptism of John.” 4 Paul said: “John baptized with the baptism of mind-change, urging the people to believe in [the one] who was going to come after him – that is, in Jesus.” 5 When they heard that, they were baptized in the name of Jesus Christ. 6 And when Paul put his hands [dual] on them, the Holy Spirit came upon them, and they spoke in tongues and talked like prophets. 7 Their whole number was around twelve men.
	8 He entered the synagogue and spoke boldly for three months, talking and bringing others to an understanding of God's kingdom. 9 But when some people made themselves hard and did not believe, speaking mockery about the Way before the multitude, he abandoned them and separated the disciples from them, on every day giving talks in the hall of Tyranus.10 That happened throughout two years, and thus all that dwelt in Asia heard God's word, Jews and Greeks alike.

	11 Eru carne taure cardali, han ya senwa né, Paulo mánten. 12 Sie yando lanneli ar *quiltalanneli náner cóline helmaryallo ar panyane i hlaiwassen, ar i hlíwi váner tello, ar i olce fairi ettúler. 13 Mal enger yú vantala Yúrali imíca i et-hanter raucor i néver quete Yésuo esse innar náner haryaine lo raucor: “Canin le i Yésunen ye Paulo care sinwa.” 14 Enger yondor otso nero estaina Sceva, Yúra héra *airimo, i carner sie. 15 Mal hanquentasse i olca faire quente téna: “Yésus istan, ar ahlárien pa Paulo, mal man nar elde?” 16 Ar i nér haryaina lo i olca faire lantane téna ar turune te illi, tyarila te nore harne ar helde et sana coallo. 

	11 God did some mighty deeds, beyond what was usual, by Paul's hands. 12 Thus even clothes and aprons were carried from his skin and put on the sick ones, and the illnesses went away from them, and the wicked spirits came out. 13 But [there] were also some wandering Jews among those that threw out demons who tried to speak Jesus' name against [those] who were possessed by demons: “I command you by the Jesus whom Paul makes known.” 14 [There] were seven sons of a man called Sceva, a Jewish high priest, that did so. 15 But in answer the wicked spirit said to them: “Jesus I know, and I have heard about Paul, but who are you?” 16 And the man possessed by the wicked spirit fell upon them and conquered them all, causing them to run wounded and naked out of that house.

17 Natto sina túle illion istyanna, Yúraron ar Hellenyaron véla, té i marner Efesusse. Ar caure lantane ilyannar mici te, ar i Heru Yésuo esse náne laitaina. 18 Ar rimbali ion sáver túler ar quenter pantave pa cardaltar. 19 Lá mancali imíca i nóvo *yuhtaner ñúle comyaner parmaltar ar urtaner tai epe illion hendu. Ar onontelte i nonwe ya paityanelte tain ar hirner i mirwielta náne telpemittar *quaihúmi *lepenquean. 20 Sie, túrenen, i Heruo quetta alle ar náne carna taura.
	21 Apa nati sine náner telyane, Paulo carne ennerya in apa lendes ter Maceronia ar Acaia lelyumnes Yerúsalemenna, quetila: “Apa tuluvan tar mauya nin yú cene Róma.” 22 Mentanes Maceronianna atta núroryaron, Timoşeo ar Erasto, mal isse lemne ter lúme Asiasse.

17 This matter came to the knowledge of all, of Jews and of Greeks alike, those who dwelt in Ephesus. And fear fell upon all among them, and the name of the Lord Jesus was being praised. 18 And numerous ones of [those] who believed came and spoke openly about their deeds. 19 Not a few among those that before used magic gathered their books and burned them before the eyes [dual] of all. And they calculated the sum that they paid for them and found that their value was fifty thousand silver-pieces. 20 Thus, with power, the Lord's word grew and was made mighty.
	21 After these things were finisehd, Paul made [it] his goal that after he went through Macedonia and Achaia he was gong to travel to Jerusalem, saying: “After I shall come there it is also necessary for me to see Rome.” 22 He sent to Macedonia two of his servants, Timothy and Erastus, but he himself remained for a time in Asia. 

	23 *Os lúme yana enge lá pitya amortie pa i Tie. 24 An nér estaina Lemetrio, *telpetan, antane lá pitya lar i tanoin cariénen telpine yánar Artemisso. 25 Ar comyanes té ar i móler as taiti nati ar quente: “Neri, istalde mai i sina moliénen samilve larelva. 26 Ar cenilde ar hlarilde manen lá rie Efesusse, mal harive quanda Asiasse, Paulo sina atálie hoa şanga vinya savienna, quetiénen i tane ainor i nar cárine mainen laume nar ainor. 27 Ente, ea raxe i lá rie sina molielva nauva nattíraina, mal yú i corda i túra Artemisso nauva nótaina ve munta, metyala yú túrierya, epe ya quanda Asia ar ambar luhtar.” 28 Hlarila si ar nála quátaina rúşenen, i neri yámer: “Túra Artemis Efesuyaron ná!”

	 23 Around that time [there] was not a small uprising concerning the Way. 24 For a man called Demetrius, a silversmith, gave no small wealth to the craftsmen by making silver shrines of Artemis. 25 And he gathered them and [those] who worked with such things and said: “Men, you know well that by this our work we have our wealth. 26 And you see and you hear how not only in Ephesus, but in nearly all Asia, this Paul has brought a big crowd to a new belief, by saying that those gods that are made by hands are not gods at all. 27 Furthermore, [there] is a danger that not only this our work will be despised, but also that the temple of the great Artemis will be counted as nothing, putting an end also to her greatness, before which all Asia and [the] world bow.” 28 Hearing this and being filled with anger, the men cried: “Great is Artemis of the Ephesians!”

	29 Sie i osto náne quátaina rúciniénen, ar er sámanen lendelte rimpe mir i *tirmen, mapala Aio ar Aristarco ar tu-talala aselte nirmenen. Anette ennoli Maceroniallo lelyala as Paulo. 30 Paulo inse merne lelya minna i lienna, mal i hildor lá méraner lave sen. 31 Ennoli imíca Asio ingwi, i náner meldoryar, mentaner senna ar arcaner sello lá panya inse raxesse i *tirmende. 32 Ennoli yámer er nat ar exeli hyana nat, ar i amarimbar mici te uar sinte i casta yanen anelte ocómiénwe. 33 Etta uo tallelte Alexander et i şangallo, an i Yúrar se-ninder ompa. 34 Mal íre hanyanelte i anes Yúra, yámelte er ómanen ter *os lúme atta: “Túra Artemis Efesuyaron ná.”

	29 Thus the city was being filled with confusion, and with one mind they went rushing into the theater, seizing Gaius and Aristarchus and bringing them [dual] with them [plural] by force. They [dual] were people from Macedonia traveling with Paul. 30 Paul himself wanted to go inside to the people, but the disciples were not willling to let him. 31 Some among the rulers of Asia, that were his friends, sent to him and asked of him not to put himself in danger in the theater. 32 Some cried one thing and others another thing, and the greater number [i amarimbar, the most numerous ones] did not know the reason by which they were assembled. 33 Therefore they together brought forward Alexander out of the crowd, for the Jews pushed him forward. 34 But when they understood that he was a Jew, they cried with one voice for [ter, through] around two hours: “Great is Artemis of [the] Ephesians!”

	35 Apa i ostotecindo carne i şanga quilda, quentes: “Neri, man ea mici atani ye ua ista in Efesuyaron osto cundo ná i cordo i túra Artemisso ar i emmo ya lantane menello? 36 Etta, pan mo ua pole láquete ta, caruvalde mai qui nalde quilde ar carir munta pen sanwe. 37 An atálielde neri sine i uar pilur cordaron ar uar equétie yaime ana ainilva. 38 Etta, qui Lemetrio ar i tanor óse samir cos as aiquen, ear auri namiéva ar ear nóreturcor: Lava tien tala i costi yar samilte, quén as i exe, i námonnar. 39 Mal qui cestalde amba han ta, mauya i şanya combe tulca sa. 40 An ea raxe i nurri pa amortie nauvar talane venna apa ya amartie síra, an ualve same erya casta antáven pa yalme sina.” 41 Ar apa quentes ta, mentanes i ocómienwar oa.

	35 After the city scribe made the crowd quiet, he said: “Men, who is [there] among men who does not know that the city of the Ephesians is guardian of the temple of the great Artemis and of the image that fell from heaven? 36 Therefore, since one cannot deny that, you will do well if you are still and do nothing without thought. 37 For you have brought these men that are not robbers of temples and have not spoken mockery against our goddess. 38 Therefore, if Demetrius and the craftsmen with him have a dispute with anyone, [there] are court days [lit. days of judgement] and [there] are proconsuls [nóreturcor, land-chiefs]: Let them bring the disputes that they have, one with the other, to the judges. 39 But if you seek more beyond that, it is necessary that a regular assembly settles [tulca, establishes] it. 40 For [there] is danger that complaints about uprising will be brought against us after what has happened today, for we do not have a single reason to give concerning this clamour.” 41 And after he said that, he sent the ones having assembled away.

RANTA 20 
Íre i amortie náne vanwa, Paulo tultane i hildor, ar apa hortanes te ar quente námarie téna, lendes oa menien mir Maceronia. 2 Apa lendes ter sane ménar ar hortane i enger tasse rimbe quettalínen, túles mir Hellas. 3 Ar apa termarnes astar nelde tasse, cirumnes oa Sirianna, mal pan i Yúrar carner panoli ana se, carnes i cilme i nanwenumnes ter Maceronia. 4 Óse i lendasse enger Sosipater yondorya Pirro Veroiallo, Aristarco ar Secundo Şessalonicallo, ar Aio Lervello, ar Timoşeo ar Trifimo Asiallo. 5 Té lender epe me ar homper men Troasse, 6 mal elme cirner oa Filippillo apa i auri *Alapúline Massaron, ar túlelme téna Troasse nó auri lempe náner vanwe. Tasse lemnelme ter rí otso.

CHAPTER 20
When the uprising was over, Paul summoned the disciples, and after he encouraged them and said farewell to them, he went away to go into Macedonia. 2 After he went through those regions and encouraged [those] that were there with numerous words, he came into Greece. 3 And after he remained three months there, he was going to said away to Syrian, but since the Jews made plans against him, he made the choice that he was going to return through Macedonia. 4 With him on the journey were Sosipather the son of Pyrrhus from Beroea, Aristarchus and Secundus from Thessalonica, and Gaius from Derbe, and Timothy and Tryphimus from Asia. 5 They went before us and waited for us in Troas, but we sailed away from Philippi after the days of Unleavened Breads, and we came to them in Troas before five days were gone. There we remained for seven days.

7 I minya auresse i otsolo, íre anelme ocómienwe racien massa, Paulo carampe téna, pan autumnes i hilyala auresse, ar quétanes tenna ende i lómio. 8 Mal enger rimbe calmali i oromardesse yasse anelme ocómienwe. 9 Hamila ara i lattin enge nessa nér estaina Eutico, ye lantane mir núra fúme íre Paulo quétane, ar taltala fúmesse lantanes undu i neldea talamello ar náne qualina íre anes ortana. 10 Mal Paulo ununte, hantanexe senna, panyane rancuryat *os se ar quente: “Áva care yalme, an náse en coirea.” 11 Tá nanwennes ama, rance i massa ar mante, ar carampes tenna ára ar tá oante. 12 Mal i seldo tallelte oa coirea, ar anelte tiutane lesta pella. 

	7 On the first day of the week, when we were assembled to break bread, Paul talked to them, since he was going away on the following day, and he was speaking until the middle of the night. 8 But [there] were many lamps in the upper hall where we were assembled. 9 Sitting by the window was a young man called Eutychus, who fell into deep sleep while Paul was talking, and collapsing in sleep he fell down from the third floor and was dead when he was lifted up. 10 But Paul went down, threw himself upon him, put his arms around him and said: “Do not make clamour, for he is still alive.” 11 Then he returned up, broke the bread and ate, and he talped until dawn and then went away. 12 But the boy they brough away alive, and they were comforted beyond measure.

	13 Sí lendelme epe te i luntenna ar cirner oa Assosenna, yasse camumnelme Paulo mir i cirya. An apa antanes canwar pa ta, isse merne lelya talyanten. 14 Íre túles tenna i nóme yasse anelme mi Assos, camnelmes mir i lunte ar lender Mitilenenna. 15 Ar apa cirnelme talo i hilyala auresse túlelme ara Cios, ar apa an ré rahtanelme tenna Samos, ar i hilyala auresse túlelme mir Miletus. 16 An Paulo carne i cilme i lahtumnes Efesus, lá merila hauta Asiasse, an anes lelyala hormesse: Qui poldes mernes tene Yerúsalemenna nó i Aşar Otsolaron Otso.
	17 Mal ho Miletus mentanes Efesusenna ar tultane i amyárar i ocombeo. 18 Íre túlelte senna quentes téna: “Istalde mai manen i minya aurello ya túlen Asianna anen aselde i quanda lúmesse, 19 molila i Herun mi ilya naldie, arwa nírion ar perperila i şangier yar martaner nin i Yúraron ulce panoinen, 20 íre uan hempe lello erya nat aşea len, hya loitane peanta len epe i lie ar i coassen. 

	13 Now we went before them to the boat and sailed away to Assos, where we were going to receive Paul into the ship. For after he gave commands about that, he himself wished to go on his feet [= by foot]. 14 When he came as far as the place where we were in Assos, we received him into the boat and went to Mitylene. 15 And after we sailed from there on the following day we came beside Chios, and after one more day we reached as far as Samos, and on the following day we came into Miletus. 16 For Paul made the choice that he would pass over Ephesus, not wishing to halt in Asia, for he was traveling in urgency: If he could he wanted to reach Jerusalem before the Festival of Seven Weeks [= Pentecost].
	17 But from Miletus he sent to Ephesus and summoned the elders of the congregation. 18 When they came to him he said to them: “You know well how from the first day that I came to Asia I was with you the whole time, 19 working for the Lord in all lowliness, having tears and suffering the tribulations that happened to me by the evil plans of the Jews, 20 while I did not keep from you a single thing beneficial to you, or failed to instruct you before the people and in the houses.

21 Mal *vettanenye Yúrain ar Hellenyain véla pa inwis Erunna ar savie Herulvasse, Yésus. 22 Ar sí, yé, nútina i fairesse lelyan Yerúsalemenna, ómu uan ista yar martuvar nin sasse, 23 hequa in ilya ostosse i Aire Fea *vetta nin i núteli ar şangiéli hópar nin. 24 Ananta uan note coivienya ta melda nin, qui ece nin telya núromolienya ya camnen i Heru Yésullo: *Vettie pa i evandilyon i lisseo Eruo.
	25 Ar sí, yé, inye ista in ualde cenuva cendelenya ata, elde illi imíca i vantanenye, carila sinwa i aranie. 26  Etta *vettan illin mici le i nanye poica i sercello ilye atanion, 27 an uan ehépie imne nyariello len Eruo quanda pano.

21 But I witnessed to Jews and to Greeks alike about repentance towards God and faith in our Lord, Jesus. 22 And now, behold, bound in the spirit I go to Jerusalem, though I do not know [the things] that will happen to me in it, 23 except that in every city the Holy Spirit witnesses to me that bonds and tribulations are waiting for me. 24 And yet I do not count my life that dear to me, if it is possible for me to complete my ministry which I received from the Lord Jesus: Witnessing about the gospel of the grace of God.
	25 And now, behold, I know that you will not see my face again, you all among whom I walked, making known the kingdom  26 Therefore I witness to all among you that I am clean from the blood of all men, 27 for I have not kept myself from telling you God's entire plan. 

	28 Cima inde ar i quanda lámáre ya i Aire Fea apánie ortírieldasse. Na mavari i Heruo ocomben, ya ñentes véra serceryanen. 29 Inye ista i apa autan, lumne ñarmoli tuluvar mici le, i uar oravuva i lámáresse, 30 ar ho elde ortuvar nelli i quetir rícine natali, tucien oa i hildor apa inte. 31 Etta na coive, enyalila manen ter loar nelde, lómisse yo auresse, uan pustane peanta len nírelínen. 32 Ar sí antan le olla Erun ar lisseryo quettan, ya pole carasta le ama ar anta len rantalda ve indyoni, as ilye i airintar. 33 Telpe hya malta hya larma uan ecestie ho aiquen. 34 Elde istar i mát sine ániet nin ar in enger asinye maurelmar. 35 Illume tannen len in íre sie molilde mauya len manya i nar milye ar enyale i quetta ya i Heru Yésus immo quente: Antave ná alasse túra lá camie.

	28 Watch yourselves and the entire flock which the Holy Spirit has put in your patronage [/care, protection, overseership]. Be shepherds for the Lord's congregation, which he gained with his own blood. 29 I know that after I pass, oppressive wolves will come among you, that do not have mercy on the flock, 30 and from yourselves [there] will arise some men that speak twisted things, to draw away the disicples after themselves. 31 Therefore be awake, recalling how through[out] three years, at night and at day, I did not stop instructing you with tears. 32 And now I give you over to God and to the word of his grace, which can build you up and give you your part as heirs, with all the sanctified ones. 33 Silver or gold or garment I have not sought from anyone. 34 You yourselves know that these hands have given me and [those] who were with me our needs. 35 I always showed you that when you so work it is necessary for you to help [those] that are weak and to recall the word with the Lord Jesus himself spoke: Giving is a joy greater than receiving.

26 Ar apa quentes quettar sine, lantanes occaryanta as illi mici te ar hyamne. 27 Enge fárea yaimie mici te illi, ar lantanelte Paulo axenna ar minquer se. 28 An or ilqua anelte ñwalyaine i quettanen ya quentes, in ualte cenumne cendelerya ata. Tá hilyaneltes i luntenna.

26 And after he spoke these words, he fell upon his knees [dual] with all among them and prayed. 27 [There] was quite a lot of [lit. sufficient] wailing among them all, and they fell upon Paul's neck and kissed him. 28 For above everything they were being tormented by the word that he said, that they were not going to see his face again. Then they followed him to the boat.

RANTA 21 
Apa mauyanelme imme hehta te ar cirner oa, lendelme térave Cosenna, mal i hilyala auresse Rolosenna, ar talo Pataranna. 2 Ar apa hirnelme lunte ya lelyumne Foicinianna, lendelme mina sa ar cirner oa. 3 Apa cennelme Cipros, lendelme ara sa i hyaryasse, cirner Sirianna ar túler Tírenna, an ta náne i enne i armaron i luntesse.  

CHAPTER 21
After we compelled ourselves to leave them and sailed away, we went straight to Cos, but on the following day to Rhodos, and from there to Patara. 2 And after he found a boat that was to go to Phoenicia, we went aboard [lit. into it] and sailed away. 3 After we saw Cyprus, we went past it on the left, sailed to Syria and came to Tyre, for that was the destination [enne: goal] of the goods on the boat. 

4 Cestanelme i hildor ar hirner te, ar lemnelme tasse ter rí otso. Mal i Fairenen quentelte Paulonna: “Áva panya tál Yerúsalemesse!” 5 Mal íre i auri náner vanwe, etelendelme ar menner tielmasse. Illi mici te, as i nissi ar híni, hilyaner me tenna ette i osto. Ar apa lantie occalmanta i fárasse hyamnelme, 6 ar quentelme namárie quén i exenna, ar lendelme mir i lunte, mal té nanwenner marda.
	7 Ho Tír túlelme Ptolemaisenna, telyala i luntelenda. *Suilanelme i hánor ar lemner er ré aselte. 8 I hilyala auresse cirnelme oa ar túler Césareanna, ar lendelme mir coarya Filip, nér ye cárane sinwa i evandilyon. Anes imíca i Otso, ar lemnelme óse. 9 Enger as nér sina selyer canta, vendeli, i sámer Erutercáno anna.

4 We sought the disciples and found them, and we remained there for [ter 'through'] seven days. But by the Spirit they said to Paul: “Do not set foot in Jerusalem!” 5 But when the days were past, we went forth and went on our way. All among them, with the women and children, followed us as far as the outside of the city. And after falling to our knees on the beach we prayed, 6 and we said farewell to one another, and we went into the boat, but they returned home.
	7 From Tyre we came to Ptolemais, completing the voyage [luntelenda: boat-journey]. We greeted the brothers and remained one day with them. 8 On the following day we sailed away and came to Caesarea, and we went into the house of Philip, a man who was making known the gospel. He was among the Seven, and we remained with him. 9 [There] were with this man four daughters, virgins, who had a prophet's gift. 

10 Mal lan lemnelme tasse ter nóte aurion, Erutercáno yeo esse náne Ahavo túle undu Yúreallo, ar túles menna ar nampe i quilta Paulova. Nuntes vére talyat ar máryat ar quente: “Sin quete i Aire Fea: I nér ye harya quilta sina i Yúrar Yerúsalemesse nutuvar, ar antauvaltes olla Úyúrain.” 12 Íre hlasselme si, elme ar i marner tasse véla arcaner sello: “Áva lelya ama Yerúsalemenna!” 13 Tá Paulo hanquente: “Mana cáralde, yaimie ar racila endanya? An inye manwa ná, lá rie náven nútina, mal yú qualien Yerúsalemesse i essen i Heru Yésuo.” 14 Íre lá ence men vista sámarya, pustanelme arca ar quenter: “Lava i Heruo indómen marta.”

10 But while we remained there for [ter 'through'] a number of days, a prophet whose name was Agabus came down from Judea, and he came to us and took the belt of Paul. He bound his own feet and hands and said: “Thus says the Holy Spirit: The man who owns this belt the Jews in Jerusalem will bind, and they will give him over to non-Jews.” 12 When we heard this, we and [those] who dwelt there alike asked of him: “Do not go up to Jerusalem!” 13 Then Paul answered: “What are you doing, wailing and breaking my heart? For I am ready, not just to be bound, but also to die in Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus.” 14 When it was not possible for us to change his mind, we stopped asking and said: “Let the Lord's will happen.”

	15 Apa auri sine manwanelme ar lender lendalmasse Yerúsalemenna. 16 Mal ennoli i hildoron Yerúsalemello yú lender aselme, talien me i nerenna yeva coasse marumnelme: Mnason, ye náne i minye hildoron. 

	15 After these days we prepared and went on our journey to Jerusalem. 16 But some of the discipes from Jerusalem also went with us, to bring us to the man in whose house we were going to dwell: Mnason, who was of the first disciples.

	17 Íre túlelme Yerúsalemenna, i hánor me-camner mi alasse. 18 Mal i hilyala auresse Paulo lende aselme mir coarya Yácov, ar ilye i amyárar enger tasse. 19 Ar *suilaneltet ar nyarner pa ilya erya nat ya Eru carne imíca i nóri núromolieryanen.
	20 Hláriéla ta antanelte alcar Erun, ar quentelte senna: “Yétal, háno, manen ear liyúmeli i savir imíca i Yúrar, ar illi mici te uryar i Şanyen. 21 Mal ahlárielte in anaie quétina pa elye i peániel imíca i liendi i mauya tien tare oa Mósello, peantala tien i vá *osciruvalte hínaltar hya hilya i haimi. 22 Mana, tá, caruvalve? Tanca ná i hlaruvalte in utúliel. 
	
	17 When we came to Jerusalem, the brothers received us in [or, with] joy. 18 But on the following day Paul went with us into the house of James, and all the elders were there. 19 And they greeted them and told about every single thing that God did among the nations by his ministry.
	20 After hearing that they gave glory to God, and they said to him: “You behold, brother, how [there] are multitudes that believe among the Jews, and all among them burn for the Law. 21 But they have heard that it has been said concerning you that you have taught among the nations that it is necessary for them to stand away from Moses, teaching them that they are not to circumcise their children or follow the customs. 22 What, then, are we to do? It is certain that they will hear that you have come.

23 Etta cara nat sina ya nyarilme len: Ear aselme neri canta i samir vanda. 24 Áte tala aselye ar á poita imle aselte, ar alye paitya tien, cirieltan i findele careltallo. Tá illi hanyuvar i ya ahlárielte pa lye ua nanwa, mal i elye hilya i Şanye ar hepe sa. 25 Pa i Úyúrar i savir elve etécier téna, canila i mauya tien hepe inte oa yallo anaie *yácina cordonin, ho serce, ho hráve quórine celvaron ar ho *hrupuhtie.” 
	26 Tá Paulo talle i neri óse, ar i hilyala auresse poines inse aselte ar lende mir i corda, carien sinwa i ré yasse sovallelta nauvane telyana ar i *yanca nauvane talaina ilquenen mici te.

23 Therefore do this thing that we tell you: [There] are with us four men that have a vow. 24 Bring them with you and purify yourself with them, and you pay for them, for them to cut the hair off their head. Then all will understand that what they have heard about you is not true, but that you follow the Law and keep it. 25 Concerning the non-Jews that believe we have written to them, commanding that it is necessary for them to keep themselves away from what has been sacrificed to idols, from blood, from flesh of strangled animals and from fornication.”
	26 Then Paul brought the men with him, and on the following day he purified himself with them and went into the temple, to make known the date when their purification was going to be completed and the sacrifice was going to be brought for each one among them.

	27 Mal şintave nó i rí otso náner telyane, i Yúrar Asiallo cenner se i cordasse ar tyarne amortie imíca i şanga, ar panyanelte máltat sesse 28 ar yámer: “Neri Israélo, á manya! Nér sina ná ye peanta ilquenen mi ilya nóme ana i lie ar i Şanye, ar ana nóme sina! Ente, atálies Hellenyali mir i corda, vahtala aire nóme sina!” 29 An nóvo cennelte Trifimo Efesusello i ostosse óse, ar intyanelte i Paulo talle se mir i corda. 30 Ar i quanda osto náne valtana, ar i lie norne uo, ar nampelte Paulo ar tuncer se et i cordallo. Mí imya lú i andor náner holtane. 31 Ar íre cestenelte nahta se, quetta túle i turconna i hosseo pa quanda Yerúsalem nála rúcina. 32 Pen hopie talles ohtalli ar *tuxantulli ar norne undu téna. Cenila i turco ar i ohtari pustanelte palpa Paulo.
	
	27 But shortly before the seven days were complete, the Jews from Asia saw him in the temple and caused an uprising among the crowd, and they put their hands on him 28 and cried: “Men of Israel, help! This man is [the one] who teaches everyone in every place against the people and the Law, and against this [holy] place! Furthermore, he has brought some Greeks into the temple, defiling this holy place!” 29 For before they saw Tryphimus from Ephesus in the city with him, and they supposed that Paul brought him into the temple. 30 And the whole city was stirred, and the people ran together, and they seized Paul and dragged him out of the temple. In the same moment the gates were closed. 31 And while they sought to kill him, word came to the chief of the army, about all of Jerusalem being in disorder. 32 Without waiting he brought some soldiers [ohtar-li > ohtalli] and centurions [tuxantur-li > tuxantulli] and ran down to them. Seeing the chief and the soldiers they stopped beating Paul. 

33 Tá i hosseturco túle hare ar nampe se ar canne: “Áse nute limil attanen!” Ar maquentes pa man anes ar pa mana carnelyanes. 34 Mal ennoli i şangasse yámer er nat ar exeli hyana nat. Castanen i ramo poldes pare munta tulca, ar cannes i talumnelte Paulo i *estolienna. 35 Mal íre túles i tyellennar mauyane i ohtarin colitas, i şango ormenen. 36 An i liyúme i lieo hilyane te, yámala: “Áse nahta!”

33 Then the army commander came and took him and commanded: “Bind him with two chains!” And he asked about who he was and about what he had done. 34 But some in the crowd cried one thing and others another thing. By reason of the noise he could learn nothing certain, and he commanded that they were to bring Paul to the [army] camp. 35 But when he came to the steps [= the stairs] it was necessary for the soldiers to carry him, because of the violence of the crowd. 36 For the multitude of the people followed him, crying: “Kill him!”

	37 Íre tulyauvaneltes mir i *estolie, Paulo quente i hosseturconna: “Ma lertan quete nat lyenna?” Quentes: “Ma istal quete Hellenya? 38 Ma nanwave ual i Mirra ye nó auri sine tyarne amortie ar tulyane i *sicilmor húmi canta mir i ravanda?” 39 Tá Paulo quente: “Inye Yúra nér, nóna mi Tarsus Ciliciasse, osto lá nulla. Mal arcan lyello: Ánin lave quete i lienna!” 

	37 When they were going to lead him into the camp, Paul said to the army commander: “May I say something to you?” He said: “Can you speak Greek? 38 Are you really not the Egyptian who before these days caused an unrising and led the four thousand dagger men into the wilderness?” 39 Then Paul said: “I [am] a Jewish man, born in Tarsus in Cilicia, a city not obscure. But I ask of you: Allow me to speak to the people!”

40 Apa láves ta, Paulo, tarila i tyellessen, léve máryanen i lien. Íre tumna quilde lantane, carampes téna i Heverya lambesse, quetila: 

40 After he allowed that, Paul, standing on the steps, moved with his hand to the people. When a deep silence fell, he spoke to them in the Hebrew language, saying:

RANTA 22 
“Neri, hánor ar atari, hlara ni quéta inyen!” 2 Íre hlasselte i quétanes téna i Heverya lambesse, anelte en ambe quilde, ar eques: 3 “Inye Yúra ná, nóna mi Tarsus Ciliciasse, mal peantana osto sinasse epe talu Amaliélo mí tarya lé i Şanyeo atarilvaron. Anen uryala Erun ve illi mici lé aure sinasse. 4 Ar lenden roitala Tie sina i qualmenna, nútala ar antala olla mir mando neri ar nissi véla, 5 ve yú i héra *airimo ar i quanda combe amyáraron polir *vetta nin. Ho té yú ñenten mentali i hánonnar Lamascusse, ar engen tienyasse talien yú i enger tasse nútine Yerúsalemenna paimen.

CHAPTER 22
“Men, brothers and fathers, hear me speak for myself!” 2 When they heard that he was speaking to them in the Hebrew language, they were still more silent, and he said: 3 “I am a Jew, born in Tarsus in Cilicia, but instructed [or, educated] in this city before the feet of Gamaliel in the tough manner of the Law of our fathers. I was burning for God like all among you [are] on this day. 4 And I went pursuing this Way to the death, binding and giving over into prison men and women alike, 5 as also the chief priest and the entire council of elders can witness for me. From them I also got messages to the brothers in Damascus, and I was on my way to bring also [those] that were there bound to Jerusalem for punishment.

	6 Mal lendanyasse, íre túlen hare Lamascusenna, *os ende i aureo, rincanen et menello hoa cala caltane ninna, 7 ar lantanen cemenna ar hlasse óma quéta ninna: 'Saul, Saul, mana castalya roitien ni?' 8 Hanquenten: 'Man nalye, Heru?' Ar quentes ninna: 'Nanye Yésus Nasaretello, ye elye roita.' 9 I neri i enger asinye cenner i cala, mal ualte hlasse i óma yeo quétane ninna. 10 Tá quenten: 'Mana caruvan, Heru?' I Heru quente ninna: 'Á orta, mena mir Lamascus, ar tasse ilqua ya ná lyen sátina carien nauva nyárina lyen.' 11 Mal uan polde cene, i alcarnen sana calo, ar tulyaina i mánen lo i enger asinye túlen mir Lamascus. 

	6 But on my journey, when I came near to Damascus, around the middle of the day, suddenly out of heaven a great line shone at me, 7 and I fell to earth and heard a voice say to me: 'Saul, Saul, what is your reason for persecuting me?' 8 I answered: 'Who are you, Lord?' And he said to me: 'I am Jesus from Nazareth, whom you pursue.' 9 The men that were with me saw the light, but they did not hear the voice of [the one] who was speaking to me. 10 Then I said: 'What am I to do, Lord?' The Lord said to me: 'Rise, go into Damascus, and there everything which is appointed to you to do will be told you.' 11 But I could not see, because of the glory of that light, and being led by the hand by [those] that were with me I came into Damascus.

	12 Mal nér estaina Ananías, ye náne *ainocimya i Şanyenen ar sáme mára *vettie ilye i Yúrallon i marner tasse, 13 túle ninna, ar tarila ara ni quentes ninna: 'Saul, háno, cena ata!' Ar mí imya lúme polden ata cene, cenila se. 14 Quentes: 'Atarilvaron Aino icílie lyé istien indómerya ar cenien i Faila ar hlarien antoryo óma, 15 an elye nauva *vetto sen ilye atanin, pa i nati yar ecéniel ar ahláriel. 16 Ar sí, manen ná i hópal? Á orta, na sumbana ar sova úcarilyar oa yaliénen esseryanen.'

12 But a man called Ananias, who was reverent according to [or 'by', -nen] the Law and had a good witness from all the Jews that dwelt there, 13 came to me, and standing by me he said to me: “Saul, brother, see again!” And in the same hour I could again see, seeing him. 14 He said: 'The God of our fathers has chosen you to know his will and to see the Just One and to hear the voice of his mouth, 15 for you will be a witness to him to all men, about the things that you have seen and have heard. 16 And now, how is it that you are waiting? Rise, be baptized and wash your sins away by calling on [or 'by', -nen] his name.

	17 Mal apa nanwennen Yerúsalemenna ar hyamne i cordasse, camnen maur 18 ar cenne se quéta ninna: 'Na linta ar á auta Yerúsalemello hormenen, an ualte camuva *vettielya pa ní.' 19 Ar inye quente: 'Heru, té istar mai in inye hante mir mando ar rípe mi ilya *yomencoa i sáver lyesse, 20 ar lan Stefáno *vettolyo serce náne etulyaina, yú inye tárane hare ar sanne mai pa ya martane, ar tíranen i collar i queniva i nacanter se.' 21 Ananta quentes ninna: 'Mena, an lye-mentauvan haire nórennar!'

	17 But after I returned to Jerusalem and prayed in the temple, I received a vision 18 and saw him say to me: 'Be quick and go away from Jerusalem with urgency, for they will not receive your witness about me.' 19 And I said: 'Lord, they know well that I threw into gaol and flogged in every synagogue [those] that believe in you, 20 and while the blood of Stephen your witness was being poured forth, I as well was standing near and thought well about what happened, and I was watching the cloaks of the people that killed him.' 21 And yet he said to me: 'Go, for I will send you to far-off nations!'

	22 Lastaneltes tenna quentes quetta sina, ar tá ortanelte ómalta, quetila: “Á mapa taite nér oa cemello, an uas valda coiviéno!” 23 Ar pan yámelte ar paller collaltar ar hanter asto mir i vilya, 24 i hosseturco canne i mo talumne se mir i *estolie, náven céşina riptiénen, istieryan i casta yanen sie yámelte senna. 25 Mal apa lenuneltes lattalínen i riptien, Paulo quente i *tuxanturenna ye tárane tasse: “Ma lertal ripta nér ye Rómea ná, ar ye ua námina?” 26 Íre i *tuxantur hlasse ta, lendes i hosseturconna ar nyarne sa sen, quetila: “Mana caruval? An i nér Rómea ná!”
	22 They listened until he said this word, and then they raised their voice, saying: “Take such a man away from earth, for he is not worthy of life!” 23 And since they shouted and shook their cloaks and threw dust into the air, 24 the army chief commanded that one was to bring him into the camp, in order to be examined by flogging, for him to know the reason why [yanen, by which] they shouted at him so. 25 But after they stretched him out with straps for the flogging, Paul said to the centurion who was standing there: “May you flog a man who is Roman, and who is not judged?” 26 When the centurion heard that, he went to the army chief and told it to him, saying: “What are you going to do? For the man is a Roman!”
27 Etta i hosseturco túle senna ar maquente: “Ánin nyare, ma nalye Rómea?” Eques: “Nanye.” 28 I hosseturco hanquente: “Mancanen ninna lertier sine túra nonwenen.” Paulo quente: “Mal inye náne nóna mir tai.”
	29 Etta, mí imya lú, i neri i ceşumner se ñwalmenen tarner oa sello, ar caure nampe i hosseturco íre hirnes in é anes Rómea, apa se-nuntelyanes.
	30 I hilyala auresse mernes ista tancave mana ulco i Yúrar quenter in acáries. Etta se-lehtanes i limilillon ar canne i Tára Comben i ocomumnelte. Tá talles Paulo ar panyane se epe te. 

27 Therefore the army commander came to him and asked: “Tell me, are you Roman?” He said: “I am.” 28 The army commander answered: “I traded to myself those rights [lertier, freedoms] with a great sum [of money].” Paul said: “But I was born into them.”
	29 Therefore, in the same moment, the men that were going to examine him by torture stood away from him, and fear seized the army commander when he found that he was Roman, after he had bound him.
	30 On the following day he wished to know certainly what evil the Jews said that he had [Q: has] done. Therefore he released him from the chains and commanded the High Council that they were to assemble. Then he brought Paul and put him before them.

RANTA 23 
Paulo, yétala i Tára Combe, quente: “Neri, hánor, elengien epe Eru mi ilvana *immotuntie, tenna aure sina.” 2 Tá Ananías i héra *airimo canne in tarner ara se i petumneltes i antosse. 3 Tá Paulo quente senna: “Eru petuva lyé, a ramba ninquinta! Ma hámal ni-namien i Şanyenen, ar mí imya lú rácal i Şanye caniénen i nauvan pétina?” 4 I tarner ara se quenter: “Ma quétal ulco pa i héra *airimo Eruo?” 5 Ar Paulo quente: “Hánor, uan sinte i náse i héra *airimo. An ná técina: Áva quete ulco pa turco lielyo.” 
	6 Sintes in imíca i enger tasse, er ranta náne Sanducearon ar i hyana Farisaron, ar etta yámes i Tára Combesse: “Neri, hánor, inye Farisa ná, yondo Farisaron. Pa i estel ar i enortave qualinaiva nanye námaina!” 7 Pan quentes nat sina, enge cos imbi Farisar ar Sanducear, ar i liyúme náne şanca. 8 An Sanducear quetir i lá ea enortave hya vala hya faire, mal i Farisar pantave savir ilye nati sine. 

23 Paul, looking at the High Council, said: “Men, brothers, I have behaved before God with perfect conscience, until this day.”
	2 Then Ananias the chief priest commanded [those] that stood by him that they were to strike him on the mouth. 3 Then Paul said to him: “God will strike you, O whitened wall! Are you sitting to judge me by the Law, and at the same time you are breaking the Law by commanding that I shall be beaten?” 4 [Those] that stood by him said: “Are you speaking evil about the chief priest of God?” 5 And Paul said: “Brothers, I did not know that he is the chief priest. For [it] is written: Do not speak evil of a chief of your people.”
	6 He knew that among [those] that were there, one part was of [the] Sadducees and another of [the] Pharisees, and therefore he cried in the High Council: “Men, brothers, I am a Pharisee, a son of Pharisees. Concerning the hope and the resurrection of [the] dead I am being judged!” 7 Since he said this thing, there was a dispute between Pharisees and Sadducees, and the multitude was split. 8 For Sadducces say that [there] is not [any] resurrection or angel or spirit, but the Pharisees openly believe all these things.

9 Tá enge hoa yalme, ar parmangolmoli i náner i ranto i Farisaron oronter ar quenter costesse: “Ualme hire ulco mi nér sina. Mana qui faire é equétie senna, hya vala?” 10 Íre aica cos oronte, i hosseturco runce ho i tucumnelte se mir rantali, ar cannes i ohtarin i menumnelte undu rapien se et endaltallo ar talien se mir i *estolie.
	11 Mal i hilyala lómisse i Heru tarne ara se ar quente: “Huore! An ve *evettiel pa yar apir ni Yerúsalemesse, sie mauya lyen *vetta yú Rómasse.”
	12 Íre aure túle, i Yúrar carner vére ar hunter inte qui mantelte hya suncelte nó nahtie Paulo. 13 I nóte i nerion i uo antaner vanda sina náne or *canaquean. 14 Lendelte i hére *airimonnar ar i amyárannar ar quenter: “Ánielme vanda i ualme matuva nó anahtielme Paulo. 15 Etta nyara i hosseturcon, elde as i Tára Combe, i mauya sen tala se undu lenna, ve qui merilde care centa istien ambe tancave i nati yar apir se. Mal nó tuluvas hare, elme nauvar manwe nahtien se.”

	9 Then there was great clamour, and some scribes that were of the party [ranta, 'part'] of the Pharisees arose and said in dispute: “We do not find [any] evil in this man. What if a spirit has indeed spoken to him, or an angel?” 10 When a sharp strife arose, the army commander feared [Q: feared from] that they were going to pull him into pieces, and he commanded the soldiers that they were to go down to snatch him out of their midst and to bring him into the camp.
	11 But on the following day the Lord stood by him and said: “Courage! For as you have witnessed about [the things] that concern me in Jerusalem, so it is necessary for you to witness also in Rome.” 12 When day came, the Jews made a compact and cursed themselves if they ate or drank before killing Paul. 13 The number of the men who together gave this oath was over forty. 14 They went to the chief priests and to the elders and said: “We have given an oath that we are not going to eat before we have killed Paul. 15 Therefore tell the army chief, you together with the High Council, that it is necessary for him to bring him down to you, as if you wish to make an inquiry to know more certainly the things that concern him. But before he shall come near, we shall be ready to kill him.”

	16 Mal íre Paulo néşo yondo hlasse i caitumnelte nurtane nahtien se, lendes senna, ar íre túles i *estolienna sa-nyarnes sen. 17 Etta Paulo yalde quén imíca i *tuxanturi ar quente: “Á tala nessa nér sina i hosseturconna, an samis nat nyarien sen.” 18 Etta nér sina nampe se ar talle se i hosseturconna, ar eques: “Paulo, i nútina nér, yalde ni ar arcane nillo i talumnen nessa nér sina lyenna, an samis nat quetien lyen.” 19 I hosseturco nampe márya ar lende oa véra nómenna ar maquente: “Mana samil nyarien ninna?” 

	16 But when Paul's sister's son heard that they were lying hidden to kill him, he went to him, and when he came to the camp he told it to him. 17 Therefore Paul called one among the centurions and said: 'Bring this young man to the army chief, for he has a thing to tell him.” 18 Therefore this man took him and brought him to the army chief, and he said: “Paul, the bound man, called me and asked of me that I would bring this young man to you, for he has a thing to say to you.” 19 The army chief took his hand and went away to a private place and asked: “What do you have to tell me?”

	20 Hé quente: “I Yúrar uo acárier pano in arcuvalte in enwa taluval Paulo undu i Tára Combenna, ve qui merilte pare ambe tancave mana acáries. 21 Mal elye áva lave tien şahta lye mir carie ta, an ambe lá *canaquean neri mici te cáyar nurtane hopila sen, ar unútielte inte vandanen in ualte matuva hya sucuva nó anahtieltes, ar sí nalte manwe, hopila şáquetielyan.” 22 Tá i hosseturco oante i nessa nerello apa canie sen: “Áva quete aiquenna i ápantiel nati sine nin.”
	23 Ar yaldes atta i *tuxanturion ar quente: “Á manwa ohtari tuxa atta menien Césareanna, as roqueni *otoquean ar neri tuxa atta i colir hatili, i neldea lúmesse i lómio. 24 Ente, á tala roccoli. Sie, lavila Paulon norta, taluvaltes mi varnasse Felix i nórecánonna.” 

	20 He said: “The Jews together have made a plan that they will ask that tomorrow you will bring Paul down to the High Council, as if they want to learn more certainly what he has done. 21 But you do not [imperative] allow them to induce you into doing that, for more than forty men among them are lying hidden waiting for him, and they have bound themselves with an oath that they will not eat or drink before they have killed him, and now they are ready, waiting for your assent.” 22 Then the army chief went away from the young man after commanding him: “Do not say to anyone that you have revealed these things to me.”
	23 And he called two of the centurions and said: “Prepare two hundred soldiers to go to Caesarea, with seventy horsemen and two hundred men that carry spears, at the third hour of the night. 24 Furthermore, bring some horses. Thus, letting Paul ride, they will bring him in safety to Felix the governor.” 

25 Ar tences menta arwa sine quettaron: 26 “Claurio Lisias i taura nórecánonna, Felix: Hara máriesse! 27 Nér sina náne mapana lo i Yúrar ar náne hare návenna nahtana lo te, mal lantanen téna as i ohtari ar se-rehtane, pan parnen in náse Rómea. 28 Ar merila ista i casta nurrelto ana se, tallenyes undu mir Tára Combelta. 29 Hirnen i nurreli pa costeli apila Şanyelta nar talane senna, mal pa munta valda qualmeo hya limilion. 30 Man pan pano ana nér sina anaie apantana nin, mentanenyes lyenna pen hopie, ar canin i samir nurreli pa se i mauya tien quete ana se epe lyé.”
	31 Etta ohtari sine namper Paulo, ve náne tien cánina, ar taller se lómisse Antipatrisenna. 32 I hilyala auresse lávelte i roquenin lelya óse en, ar nanwenner i *estolienna.

25 And he wrote a message having these words: 26 “Claudius Lysias to the mighty governor, Felix: Greetings! [lit. sit in happiness!] 27 This man was seized by the Jews and was near to being slain by them, but I fell upon them with the soldiers and saved him, since I learnt that he was [Q: is]
 a Roman. 28 And wishing to know the reason of their complaint against him, I brought him down into their High Council. 29 I found that complaints about disputes touching on their Law are brought against him, but about nothing worthy of death or of chains. 30 But since a plan against this man has been revealed to me, I sent him to you without waiting, and I command [those] that have complaints about him that they must speak against him before you.”
	31 Therefore these soldiers took Paul, as was commanded to them, and brought him at night to Antipatris. 32 On the following day they let the horsemen go with him still, and returned to the camp.

33 I roqueni lender mir Césarea ar antane i menta i nórecánon, ar panyanelte yú Paulo epe se. 34 Apa cendanes i menta maquentes pa mana ménallo hé túle, ar parne i hé náne Ciliciallo. 35 Eques: “Hlaruvan lye, íre i queni i samir nurreli pa lyé yú tuluvar.” Ar cannes i mo hepumne se mandosse mí túrion Herolwa.

33 The horsemen went into Caesarea and gave the message to the governor, and put also Paul before him. 34 After he read the letter he asked about what region he came from, and learnt that he was from Cilicia. 35 He said: “I will hear you, when the people that have complaints about you shall arive also.” And he commanded that one was to keep him in gaol in the palace [túrion] of Herod. 

RANTA 24 
Apa rí lempe Ananías i héra *airimo túle undu as amyárali ar *carpando yeo esse náne Tertullo, ar quentelte ulco pa Paulo. 2 Íre anes yálina, Tertullo *yestane carpa ana se, quetila: 
	“Túra raine samilme ter lyé, ar envinyatiéli martar nóre sinasse apacenelyanen! 3 Mi ilye lúmi ar nómi, taura Felix, camilme tai antúra hantalénen. 4 Mal lá mapien amba lúmelyo, arcan lyenna i me-lastuval şintave, raina ve nalye. 5 An ihírielme i nér sina qolúvie ná, tyarila amortiéli imíca ilye i Yúrar ter i quanda ambar, ar náse minda mí heren i Nasaryaron, 6 quén ye yú néve vahta i corda, ar ye nampelme. Mernelme name se Şanyelmanen, 7 mal Lísias i hosseturco túle ar se-nampe et málmalto ormenen ar se-talle oa. 8 Ho hé ece elyen, ceşiénen hé, pare pa ilye i ongwi yar quetilme in acáries.”

CHAPTER 24
After five days Ananias the chief priest came down with some elders and an orator whose name was Tertulllus, and they spoke evil about Paul. 2 When he was called, Tertullus began to speak against him, saying: 
	“Great peace we have through you, and reforms [or 'renewals'] occur in this nation by your foresight! 3 In all times and places, mighty Felix, we receive those with greatest thanks. 4 But so as not to take more of your time, I ask of you that you will listen to us briefly, gracious as you are. 5 For we have found that this man is a pestilence, causing uprisings among all the Jews through[out] the entire world, and he is prominent in the sect [heren, 'order'] of the Nazarenes, 6 a person who also tried to defile the temple, and whom we seized. We wanted to judge him by our Law, 7 but Lysias the army chief came and took him out of our hands [dual] by violence and brought him away. 8 From him it is possible for you, by examining him, to learn about all the crimes that we say he has done.”

	9 I Yúrar náner astarindoryar ar quenter i sie enge. 10 Ar Paulo, íre i nórecáno hwermenen caryo láve sen carpa, hanquente:
	“Istala mai i liende sina asámie lyé ve námo ter rimbe loali, quétan lérave inyen. 11 Ece lyen pare i rie auri yunque yá lenden ama antáven tyerme Yerúsalemesse. 12 Ualte hirne ni i cordasse arwa costo as aiquen hya tyarila amortie, i *yomencoassen hya i ostosse. 

	9 The Jews were his supporters and said that so it was. 10 And Paul, when the governor with a gesture of his head allowed him to talk, answered:
	“Knowing well that this nation has had you as judge for [ter = through] many years, I am speaking freely for myself. 11 It is possible for you to learn that only twelve days ago I went up to give worship in Jerusalem. 12 They did not find me in the temple having a dispute with anyone or causing an uprising, in the synagogues or in the city.

13 Ente, ua ece tien tana in acárien i ongwi pa yar sí carpalte ana ni. 14 Mal nat sina pantave nyarin lyen: I Tienen ya estalte 'heren', sánen *veuyan Eru, savila ilye i nattor i nar i Şanyeo ar técine mí Erutercánor. 15 Ar samin estel Erunna, i imya estel ya yú neri sine samir: Euva enortave failaiva ar úfailaiva véla. 16 Etta ennenya ná in inye illume samuva poica *immotuntie Erunna ar atannar. 17 Apa loali váner, túlen talien annali oraviéva nórenyanna, ar *yacien. 18 Lan cáranen nati sine, hirnelte ni poitana i cordasse, mal lá enge şanga hya amortie. Mal enger tasse Yúrali Asiallo, 19 ar náne arya qui té túler epe lye quetien pa ongwenyar, qui samilte nur ninna. 20 Hya lava sine nerin quete mana ulco hirnelte nisse íre tarnen epe i Tára Combe, 21 qui únes sina erya quetie ya yámen íre tarnen epe te: 'Pa i enortave qualinaiva nanye námaina epe le síra!'

13 Furthermore, it is not possible for them to demonstrate that I have done [/committed] the crimes of which they now speak against me. 14 But this thing I openly tell you: By the Way that they call a 'sect', by it I serve God, believing all the matters that are of the Law and written in the Prophets. 15 And I have hope to God, the same hope that also these men have: [There] will be a resurrection of just ones and injust ones alike. 16 Therefore my goal is that I will always have a clean conscience towards God and men. 17 After some years passed, I came to bring gifts of mercy to my nation, and to sacrifice. 18 While I was doing these things, they found me cleansed in the temple, but [there] was not [any] crowd or uprising. But [there] were there some Jews from Asia, 19 and [it] was better if they came before you to speak about my crimes, if they have a complaint against me. 20 Or let these men say what evil they found in me when I stood before the High Council, 21 if it was not this single saying that I cried when I stood before them: 'Concerning the resurrection of [the]dead I am being judged before you today!'

	29 Mal Felix, istala mai i nattor yar amper i Tie, querner i neri oa ar quente: “Íre Lisias i hosseturco tuluva undu, caruvan cilmenyar pa i nattor yar apir lye.” 23 Ar cannes i *tuxanturen hepe i nér mi moica lé, ar uas pustumne aiquen mici véraryar *veviello se. 
	24 Apa réli Felix túle as Rusilla verirya, ye náne Yúra, ar talles Paulo ar lastane senna pa i savie mi Hristo Yésus. 25 Mal íre carampes pa failie ar *immoturie ar i tulila namie, Felix náne ruhtana ar hanquente: “Lú sinan á auta, mal íre samin ecie, lye-tultuvan ata.” 26 Mal mi imya lú sámes i estel i camumnes telpe Paulollo. Etta se-tultanes ta ambe rimbave, ar carampes óse. 27 Mal apa loa atta vánet, Felix náne hilyana ve nórecáno lo Porcio Festo, ar pan Felix merne same i Yúraron lisse, hehtanes Paulo nútina.

	29 But Felix, knowing well the matters that concerned the Way, turned the men away and said: “When Lysias the army chief shall come down, I will make my choices about the matters that concern you.” 23 And he commanded the centurion to keep the man in a gentle manner, and he was not going to stop anyone among his own from serving him.
	24 After some days Felix came with Drusilla his wife, who was Jewish, and he brought Paul and listened to him about the faith in Christ Jesus. 25 But when he talked about justice and self-control and the coming judgement, Felix was scared and answered: “For this time go away, but when I have an opportunity, I will summon you again.” 26 But at the same time he had the hope that he would receive money from Paul. Therefore he summoned him that more frequently, and he talked with him.
	27 But after two years passed, Felix was followed as governor by Porcius Festus, and since Felix wanted to have the grace of the Jews, he left Paul bound.

RANTA 25 
Etta Festo, íre camnes i túre or i ména, apa rí nelde lende ama Yerúsalemenna Césareallo, 2 ar i hére *airimor ar i mindar i Yúraron nyarne sen nurriltar Paulonna. Tá arcanelte Festonna, 3 cestala lis ana Paulo, i mentauvas hé Yerúsalemenna. An caitumnelte nurtane, nahtien hé i mallesse. 4 Mal Festo hanquente i Paulo lemyuuva hépina Césareasse, ar in isse nanwenuva tar ron. 5 Eques: “Etta nai i taurar mici le tuluvar undu quetien pa ongweryar, qui ea *aiqua úşanya pa se.”

CHAPTER 25 
Therefore Festus, when he received the power over the region [/province], after three days went up to Jerusalem from Caesarea, 2 and the chief priests and the prominent ones of the Jews told him their complaints against Paul. Then they asked Festus, 2 seeking a favor [lis: grace] against Paul, that he would [Q: will] send him to Jerusalem. For they were going to lie hidden, to kill him on the road. 4 But Festus answered that Paul was going to remain kept in Caesarea, and that he himself would [Q; will] return there soon. 5 He said: “Therefore may the mighty among you come down to speak of his crimes, if there is anything irregular about him.”

	6 Sie, apa lemie aselte ter rí lá or tolto hya quean, ununtes Césareanna, ar i hilyala auresse hamunes i námosondonna ar canne i mo taluva Paulo. 7 Íre túles, i Yúrar i náner tulinwe undu Yerúsalemello tarner *os se, quetila in acáries rimbe ar lunge ongweli, mal lá ence ten tana i ta  nanwa né. 
	8 Mal Paulo quente, varyala inse: “Ana i Şanye hya ana i Yúrar hya ana i Ingaran véla uan acárie erya úcare.” 9 Festo, ye merne came i mára nirme i Yúraron, hanquente Paulonna: “Ma meril lelya ama Yerúsalemenna náven námina tasse epe ni pa nattor sine?” 10 Mal eque Paulo: “Táran epe i námosonda i Ingaranwa, yasse mauya nin náve námina. Acárien munta ulca ana i Yúrar, ve yú elye mai ista. 11 Qui é acárien ongwe ar nanye valda qualmeo, uan arca uşe qualmello, mal qui uan acárie erya i ongwion yar quetilte acárien, *úquen lerta anta ni mir málta. Panyan nattonya epe i Ingaran.” 

	6 Thus, after remaining with them for [ter, through] no more than eight or ten days, he went down to Caesarea, and the following day he sat down on the judgement seat and commanded that one was to [Q: will] bring Paul. 7 When he came, the Jews that had come down from Jerusalem stood around him, saying that he had [Q: has] done numerous and weighty crimes, but it was not possible for them to show that that was true.
	8 But Paul said, defending himself: “Against the Law or against the Jews or against the High King alike I have not done [/committed] a single sin.” 9 Festus, who wanted to receive the good will of the Jews, answered Paul: “Do you want to go up to Jerusalem to be judged there before me concerning these matters?” 10 But Paul said: “I am standing before the judgement seat of the High King, where it is necessary for me to be judged. I have done nothing evil against the Jews, as also you well know. 11 If I have indeed done a crime and I am worthy of death, I do not ask to escape from death, but if I have not done a single one of the crimes which they say I have done, nobody may give me into their hand. I put my case [natto, matter] before the High King.”

12 Apa quetie as i combe, Festo hanquente: “Epe i Ingaran apánel nattolya, i Ingaranna menuval.”
	13 Apa réli váner, Árippa i aran yo Vernice túlet Césareanna *suilien Festo. 14 Apa anette tasse ter nóte rélion, Festo nyarne i aranen pa i nattor yar amper Paulo, quetila:
	“Ea nér hehtana nútina lo Felix, 15 ar íre anen Yerúsalemesse i hére *airimor ar i amyárar i Yúraron nyarner ni pa se, arcala i namuvan se ve arwa cámo. 16 Mal hanquenten téna i mici Rómear ua haime anta aiquen olla, nó i quén pa ye exeli quetir in acáries ongweli vele i quetir ana se cendello cendelenna, ar ece sen quete insen pa i nur. 

12 After speaking with the council, Festus answered: “Before the High King you have put your case; to the High King you will go.”
	13 After some days passed, Agrippa the king and Bernice came to Caesarea to greet Festus. 14 After they were there for [ter, through] a number of days, Festus told the king about the matters that concerned Paul, saying:
	“[There] is a man left bound by Felix, 15 and when I was in Jerusalem the chief priests and the elders of the Jews told me about him, requesting that I would [Q: will] judge him as having guilt. 16 But I answered them that among Romans it is not custom to give anyone over, before the person of whom others say that he had committed crimes meets those that speak against him face to face, and he has the opportunity to speak for himself concerning the complaint.

17 Etta, íre ocomnelte sisse, pen hautie hamunen i námosondasse ar canne i mo taluva i nér. 18 Tarila epe ni, i quetir in acáries ongweli uar carampe pa i olce nati yar inye intyane pa se. 19 Sámelte costeli óse pa véra *tyerielta i ainova, ar pa quén estaina Yésus, ye qualina ná, mal ye Paulo quente ná coirea. 20 Lá istala mana carumnen pa i cos sine nation, maquenten qui mernes lelya Yerúsalemenna, tasse náven námina pa nattor sine. 21 Mal íre Paulo arcane náve hépina i námien Meletyaryo, cannen i nauvas hépina tenna mentauvan se i Ingaranna.”
	22 Tá Árippa quente Festonna: “Yu inye mere hlare i nér.” Hanquentes: “Enwa hlaruvalyes.”

17 Therefore, when they assembled here, without halting I sat down on the judgement seat and commanded that one was to [Q: one will] bring the man. 18 Standing before me, those who say that he has committed crimes did not talk about the wicked things that I supposed concerning him. 19 They had some quarrels with him about their own worship of the deity, and about a person called Jesus, who is dead, but who Paul said is alive. 20 Not knowing what I was going to do about the quarrel about these things, I asked if he wanted to go to Jerusalem, there to be judged concerning these matters. 21 But when Paul asked to be kept for the judgment of His Majesty, I commanded that he is to be kept until I shall send him to the High King.”
	22 Then Agrippa said to Festus: “I as well wish to hear the man.” He answered: “Tomorrow you will hear him.” 

	23 Etta, i hilyala auresse, Árippa yo Vernice túlet mi túra alcar ar lendet mir i şambe veliéva as hosseturcoli ar minde nelli i ostollo, ar íre Festo canne, Paulo náne talana. 24 Ar Festo quente: “Aran Árippa ar elde illi i ear aselme, yétalde nér sina pa ye i quanda liyúme Yúraron uo acárie arcande nin, Yerúsalemesse ar sisse véla, yamila in uas valda coitiéno ambe. 25 Mal túnen in acáries munta valda qualmeo. Etta, íre nér sina panyane nattorya epe Meletyarya, namnen i mentauvan se. 26 Mal pa sé samin munta tanca tecien herunyanna. Etta ettallenyes epe lé, ar or illi epe elye, Aran Árippa: Apa i ceşie istuvan mana tecuvan. 27 An neme nin úhanda menta nútina quén mal loita tea i nurri senna.

	23 Therefore, on the following day, Agrippa and Bernice came with great glory and went into the audience chamber [şambe veliéva = room of meeting] with army chiefs and some prominent men from the city, and when Festus commanded, Paul was brought. 24 And Festus said: “King Agrippa and you that are with us, you behold this man concerning whom the entire multitude of Jews together have made pention to me, in Jerusalemn and here alike, crying that he is not worthy of living anymore. 25 But I perceived that he has done nothing worthy of death. Therefore, when this man put his case before his Majesty, I judged that I would [Q: will] send him. 26 But concerning him I have nothing certain to write to my lord. Therefore I brought him out before you, and above all before you, King Agrippa: After the interrogation I will know what I am to write. 27 For it seems to me senseless to send a bound person but fail to indicate the complaints against him.

RANTA 26 
Árippa quente Paulonna: “Lertal quete.” Tá Paulo rahtane máryanen ar quente, varyala inse: 
	2 “Pa ilye i ongwi yar i Yúrar quetir i acárien, Aran Árippa, nótan inse valima in epe elye síra quetin insen, 3 or ilqua i castanen in istal mai ilye i haimi ar costi mici Yúrar. Etta arcan i ni-hlaruval cólenen. 
	4 Lénya coiviéva néşenyallo – manen lenganen i yestallo nórenyasse ar mi Yerúsalem – ná sinwa lo ilye Yúrar 5 i isintier ni nóvo, qui merilte *vetta. Istalte i coivienya ve Farisa náne i amnaraca herennen *tyerielmo. 6 Ananta sí, castanen i vando antana atarilmain, táran náven námina. 7 Nosselmar yunque samir i estel i cenuvalte i vanda carna nanwa qui *veuyalte se veassenen ter lóme yo aure. Pa estel sina i Yúrar quetir i acárien ongweli, a Aran.

CHAPTER 26 
Agrippa said to Paul: “You may speak.” Then Paul reached out with his hand and spoke, defending himself:
	2 “Concerning all the crimes that the Jews say that I have done, King Agrippa, I count myself happy that [it is] before you I speak for myself today, 3 above all for the reason that you know all the customs and strifes of among Jews. Therefore I ask that you will hear me with patience.
	4 My manner of living from my youth – how I behaved from the beginning in my nation and in Jerusalem – is known by all Jews 5 that have known me beforehand, if they want to witness. They know that my life as a Pharisee was by the harshest order of our worship. 6 And yet now, by reason of the promise given to our fathers, I am standing here to be judged. 7 Our twelve tribes have the hope that they will see the promise made true if they serve him with vigour through night and day. Concerning this hope the Jews say that I have committed crimes, o King.

	8 Mana castalda namien i mo ua pole save in Eru orta qualinar? 9 Inye é sanne i mauyane nin tare ana i esse Yésus Hristova Násaretello mi rimbe léli, 10 ve yú carnen Yerúsalemesse, ar rimbali i airion panyanen mandossen apa camnen túre i hére *airimollon, ar íre mo quente pa nahtie te, illume antanen ómanya ana te. 11 Ente, rimbave paimetánen te ilye *yomencoassen ar mauyane te naiquete, an nála ita rúşea ana te yú roitanenyet mir ettelie ostor. 

	8 What is your reason for judging that one cannot believe that God rises [the] dead? 9 I indeed thought that it was necessary for me to stand against the name of Jesus Christ from Nazareth in numerous manners, 10 as I also did in Jerusalem, and numerous ones among the holy ones I put in goals after I received power from the chief priests, and when one spoke about killing them, I gave my vote [lit. voice] againat them. 11 Furthermore, I frequently punished them in all synagogues and compelled them to blaspheme, and being extremely angry against them I also pursued them into foreign cities. 

	12 Lan cáranen nati sine –  mi lenda Lamascusenna, apa camie túre ar lavie i hére *airimollon – 13 endesse i aureo, en i mallesse, cennen cala han Anaro alcar ya caltane *os ni ar *os i lender asinye.14 Ar apa illi mici me lantaner i talamenna hlassen óma quéta ninna i Heverya lambesse: 'Saul, Saul, mana castalya roitien ni? Petie ana i tildi nauva naica lyen.' 15 Mal quenten: 'Man nalye, Heru?' Ar i Heru quente: 'Inye Yésus, ye roital. 16 Ananta á orta ar tara talulyatse. An sina ennen atánienyexe lyen, lye-cilien ve núro ar *vetto yúyo yaron ecéniel ar yaron tyaruvan lyen cene, pa ni. 17 Etelehtan lye et lie sinallo ar i nórellon, yannar lye-mentan 18 pantien hendultat, te-querien morniello calanna ar Sátano túrello Erunna, camieltan apsenie úcariva ar ranta ve aryoni imíca i nar airinte saviénen nisse.'

	12 While I was doing these things – on a journey to Damascus, after receiving power and permission from the chief priests – 13 in the midst of the day, still on the road, I saw a light beyond the glory of the sun which shone around me and around [those] who travelled with me. 14 And after all among us fell to the ground I heard a voice say to me in the Hebrew language: 'Saul, Saul, what is your reason for pursuing me? Striking against the spikes will be painful for you.' 15 But I said: 'Who are you, Lord?' And the Lord said: 'I [am] Jesus, whom you pursue. 16 And yet rise and stand on your feet [dual]. For for this purpose I have shown myself to you, to choose you as a servant and a witness both of [the things] that you have seen and of [the things] that I shall cause you to see, concerning me. 17 I deliver you out of this people and from the nations, to which I send you 18 to open their eyes [dual], in order to turn them from darkness to light and from Satan's power to God, for them to receive forgiveness of sins and a part as heirs among [those] who are hallowed by believing in me.'  

	19 Etta, aran Árippa, uan loitane cime i maur menello, 20 mal minyave innar ear Lamascusse ar tá innar ear mi Yerúsalem ar i quanda nóre pelila Yúrea tallen i menta i mauya tien hire inwis ar quere inte Erunna, cariénen cardar valde inwisten. 21 Pa nati sine Yúrali ni-namper i cordasse ar néver nahta ni. 22 Mal pan anen manyana lo Eru atárien *vettala pityan yo túran, mal quetila munta hequa yar i Erutercánor ar Móses véla quenter martumner: 23 I Hristo perperumne, ar ve i minya nála ortana qualinallon, carumnes cala sinwa lie sinan ar i nórin véla.»
	24 Íre quentes nati sine varyala inse, Festo quente taura ómanen: “Nalye sámalyo ettesse, Paulo! Túra ñolme nancára sámalya!” 25 Mal Paulo quente: “Uan sámanyo ettesse, taura Festo, mal quetin quetiéli nanwiéva ar máleva sámo. 26 An i aran hanya nati sine, isse yenna quétan veriénen, an nanye tanca i munta sino uşe tuntierya, an nat sina ua anaie carna vincasse. 

	19 Therfore, king Agrippa, I did not fail to heed the vision from heaven, 20 but firstly to [those] that are in Damascus and then to [those] that are in Jerusalem and the entire land surrounding Judea I brought the message that it is necessary for them to find repentance and turn themselves to God, by doing deeds worthy of repentance.
	21 Concerning these things some Jews seized me in the temple and tried to kill me. 22 But since I was being helped by God I have stood witnessing to small and to great, but saying nothing except [the things] that the Prophets and Moses alike said were going to happen: 23 The Christ was going to suffer, and as the first being raised from [the] dead, he was going to make light known to this people and to the nations alike.»
	24 When he said these things defending himself, Festus said in a mighty voice: “You are out of your mind, Paul! Great learning is undoing your mind!” 25 But Paul said: “I am not out of my mind, mighty Festus, but I speak sayings of truth and soundness of mind. 26 For the king understands these things, he to whom I am speaking with boldness, for I am certain that nothing of this escapes his notice, for this thing has not been done in a corner.

27 Ma elye, Aran Árippa, save i Erutercánossen? Istan i savil.” 28 Mal Árippa quente Paulonna: “Mi şinta lúme quetumnel ni mir ole *Hristondur.” 29 Tá Paulo quente: “Ece nin mere Erunna i ron
hya ambe telwave, lá rie elye mal yú illi i hlárar ni síra oluvar taiti ve inye ná, ómu pen limili sine.” 30 Ar i aran oronte, ar sie carner i nórecáno ar Vernice ar i neri i na¨ner ha¨mie¨la aselte. 31 Mal íre lendelte oa carampelte quén as i exe, quetila: “Nér sina care munta valda qualmeo hya limilion.” 32 Ente, Árippa quente Festonna: “Ence lehta nér sina au uas panyane nattorya epe i Ingaran.”

27 Do you, King Agrippa, believe in the Prophets? I know that you believe.” 28 But Agrippa said to Paul: “In a short time you would talk me into becoming a Christian.” 29 Then Paul said: “I can wish to God that soon or later, not just you but also all that are hearing me today will become such as I am, though without these chains.” 30 But the king arose, and so did the the governor and Bernice and the men that had sat with them. 31 But when they went away they talked one with the other, saying: “This man does nothing worthy of death or of chains.” 32 Furthermore, Agrippa said to Festus: “It was possible to release this man if he did [/had] not put his case before the High King.”

RANTA 27 
Apa i cilme náne carna i cirumnelme Italianna, antanelte Paulo ar hyane nútine nelli olla *tuxanturen estaina Yúlio, i hosseo i Meletyaryo. 2 Lendelme mir cirya ho Arramittium ya cirumne i nómennar i falasseo Ásio. Cirnelme oa, ar aselme enge Aristarco i Maceronya, Şessalonicallo. 3 Ar i hilyala auresse rahtanelme Síronna, ar Yúlio tanne lisse Paulon ar láve sen lelya nilmoryannar ar came aşielta.
	4 Ar cirnelme oa talo ar lender nu i cauma Ciprusso, pan i súri náner ana me. 5 Ar apa cirnelme ter i eare ara Cilicia ar Pamfilia túlelme hópanna Mírasse mi Licia.  6 Mal i *tuxantur hirne cirya Alexandriallo ya cirumne Italianna, ar cannes men lelya mir ta. 7 Apa cirie lencave ter fárea nóte aurion ar tulie Cnirusenna urdave, pan sámelme i súre cendelemasse, cirnelme nu i cauma Créteo Salmonesse, 8 ar cirila urdave ara i falasse túlelme nómenna estaina Írime Hópar, hare i ostonna Laséa. 

CHAPTER 27
After the choice [or, decision] was made that we were going to sail to Italy [Italia], they gave Paul and some other bound men over to a centurion called Julius, of the army of His Majesty. 2 We went into a ship from Adramyttium which was going to sail from the coast of Asia. We sailed away, and with us was Aristarchus the Macedonian, from Thessalonica. 3 And on the following day we reached Sidon [Q: to Sidon], and Julius showed kindness [lisse: grace] to Paul and allowed him to go to his friends and receive their comfort.
	4 And we sailed away from there and went under the shelter of Cyprus, since the winds were against us. 5 And after we sailed through the open sea [eare] by Cilicia and Pamphylia we came to port in Myra in Lycia. 6 But the centurion found a ship from Alexandria that was going to sail to Italy, and he commanded us to go into that. 7 After sailing slowly for a sufficient number of days and coming to Cnidus with difficulty, since we had the wind in our face, we sailed under the shelter of Crete at Salmone, 8 and sailing difficultly by the shore we came to a place called Fair Havens, near to the city [of] Lasea.

	9 Anda lúme náne vanwa, ar sí enge raxe mi lelie earesse, an yando i Lamate vanwa né. Etta Paulo quente pa ya sannes náne i arya, 10 quetila téna: “Neri, tuntan i cirie taluva nancarie, ar olya nauva vanwa ven, lá pa i armar ar i cirya erinque, mal yú pa cuilelvar.” 11 Mal i *tuxantur cimne i hesto ar i nér ye haryane i cirya ambe lá i nati yar Paulo quente. 12 I hópa úne mára termarien ter i hríve, ar etta i amarimbar sanner i náne arya cirie oa talo, qui mi tana hya sina lé ence tien rahta tenna Fénix ar lemya tasse ter i hríve. Ta ná hópa Créteo ya ná panta forrómenna ar hyarrómenna. 

	9 A long time was gone, and now [there] was danger in traveling on sea, for even the Fast was past. Therefore Paul spoke about what he thought was the best, 10 saying to them: “Men, I perceive that sailing will bring destruction, and much will be lost to you, not concerning the goods and the ship alone, but also concerning our lives.” 11 But the centurion heeded the captain and the man who owned the ship more than the things that Paul said. 12 The haven was not good for remaining through the winter, and therefore the greater number [amarimbar = most numerous] thought that it was better to sail away from there, if in this or that manner it was possible for them to reach as far as Phoenix and remain there through the winter. That is a haven of Crete that is open towards the north-east and south-east.

	13 Ente, íre i súre hyarmello vávane sannelte in ennelta enge rahtieltasse, ar tuncelte ama i *ciryampa ar cirner ara Créteo falasse. 14 Mal apa lá anda lúme alaco, ta ya estaina Euroaquilo ná, túle rimpa i tollallo.  15 I cirya náne mapaina ar ua polle hepe langorya i súrinna, ar pustanelme neve turitas ar náner cóline. 16 Íre túlelme mir i cauma pitya tollo estaina Caura, poldelme urdiénen rehta i lunte. 17 Apa ortanelmes mir i cirya *yuhtanelte i mauresorastar ar nunter *os i cirya *rappalínen. Caurelma náne in i cirya petumne i nurtane ondor Sirtesse; etta nampelte undu i pota-velunte ar náner cóline. 18 Mal i raumo ita lumnane men, ar i hilyala auresse hantelte i armar mir i ear, 19 ar i neldea auresse hantelte vére máltanten i ciryo sorastar mir i ear. 

	13 Furthermore, when the wind from the south blew they thought that their goal was in their reach, and they pulled up the anchor and sailed along the coast of Crete. 14 But after not a long time a stormwind, that which is called Euroaquilo, came rushing from the island. 15 The ship was seized and could not keep its prow against the wind, and we stopped trying to control it and were carried [along]. 16 When we came into the shelter of a small island called Cauda, we could with difficulty save the boat [= the skiff, the lifeboat]. 17 After we lifted it into the ship we used the emergency equipment [maure-sorastar] and bound around the ship with ropes. Our fear was that the ship was going to hit the hidden rocks in Syrte; therefore they took down the front sail and were carried [along]. 18 But the storm lay extremely heavy upon us, and on the following day they threw the goods [= the cargo] into the sea, 19 and on the third day with their own hands they threw the equipment of the ship into the sea.

	20 Íre ualme cenne Anar hya tinwi rimbe rélissen, ar lá pitya raumo caine menna, firne ilya estel rehtielmo. 21 Ar apa anda lúme yasse ualte mante matta Paulo oronte mici te ar quente: “Neri, carnelde arya au lastanelde ni, lá autala Crétello, mal uşila sina nancarie ar  *úhepie. 22 Mal sí hortan le: Sama huore, an lá ea erya quén imíca le ye nauva vanwa! Rie i cirya nauva. 23 An mi lóme sina tarne epe ni vala Eruo yeo núro nanye, ar ye *tyerin. 24 Eques: 'Áva ruce, Paulo! Mauya len tare epe i Ingaran, ar yé! Eru ánie len illi i círar aselye.' 25 Etta sama huore, neri, an savin Eruo quetie, in i natto nauva aqua ve anaie nyárina nin. 26 Mal nauvalme hátine er tollo hrestanna”

	20 When we did not see the Sun or stars for many [24-hour] days, and no small storm lay upon us, all hope of our salvation faded. 21 And after a long time when they did not eat food, Paul arose among them and said: “Men, you did better if you [had] listened to me, not going away from Crete, but escaping this destruction and loss. 22 But now I exhort you: Have courage, for [there] is not a single person among you who will be lost! Only the ship will be. 23 For in this night [there] stood beforeme an angel of the God whose servant I am, and whom I worship. 24 He said: 'Do not fear, Paul! It is necessary for you to stand before the High King, and behold! God has given you all that are sailing with you.' 24 Therefore have courage, men, for I believe what God said [lit. God's saying], that the matter will be just as has been told me. 26 But we will be thrown onto the beach of some [lit. one] island.”

	27 Íre i *canaquea lóme lantane ar anelme hátaine sir ar tar Arria-earesse, endesse i lómio i ciryamor intyaner i túlalte har er norenna. 28 Ar *lestanelte manen núra i ear náne ar hirner i anes rangwi *yúquean. Lendelte şinta tie ompa ar *lestaner ata, ar hirnelte rangwi lepenque. 29 Ar pan runcelme i cé petumnelme i ondor, hantelte mir i ear *ciryampar canta i pontillo i ciryo ar milyaner tulesse aureo. 30 Mal i ciryamor, cestala uşe i ciryallo, panyaner i lunte i earesse, quetila i linguvalte *ciryampali i langollo. 31 Paulo quente i *tuxanturenna ar i ohtarinnar: “Qui neri sine uar lemya i ciryasse, ua ece len náve rehtane!” 32 Tá i ohtari cirner i *rappar i lunteo ar láver san lutta oa. 
	33 Íre aure hare né, Paulo hortane illi i matumnelte, quetila: “Síra ná i *canaquea ré yasse hópalde ú matto, an amátielde munta. 34 Etta arcan lello i matuvalde matta an ta manyuva rehtielda. An erya finde i caro aiqueno mici le lá nauva vanwa.”

	27 When the fourteenth night fell and we were thrown hither and thirther on the Sea of Adria, in the middle of the night the sailors supposed that they were [Q: are] coming near to some [lit. one] land. 28 And they measured how deep the sea was and found that it was twenty fathoms. They went a short way forward and measured again, and they found fifteen fathoms. 29 And since we feared that perhaps we were going to strike the rocks, they threw into the sea four anchors from the rear of the ship and longed for the coming of day. 30 But the sailors, seeking to escape from the ship, put the boat on the sea, saying that they were going to hang [Q: will hang] anchors from the prow. 31 Paul said to the centurion and to the soldiers: “If these men do not remain on the ship, it is not possible for you to be saved!” 32 Then the soldiers cut the ropes of the boat and let it float way.
	33 When day was near, Paul encouraged all that they were to eat, saying: “Today is the fourteenth day when you are waiting without food, for you have eaten nothing. 34 Therefore I ask of you that you will eat food, for that will help your rescue. For a single hair on the head of anyone among you will not be lost.”

35 Apa quetie quettar sine nampes massa, antane hantale Erun epe te illi, ar sa-rance ar *yestane mate. 36 Tá sámelte alasse, ar yú té manter matta. 37 Quanda nótelma i ciryasse náne enque *otoquean ar tuxa atta. 38 Apa matie i matta ya mernelte, carnelte i cirya mis lunga hatiénen i ore mir i ear.
	39 Íre aure túle, ualte sinte i nórie, mal cennelte londe yasse enge hresta, ar mernelte tala i cirya tar, qui ence tien. 40 Etta aucirnelte i *ciryampar ar láver tain lanta mir i ear, ar mí imya lú lehtanelte i lattar i *tullo. Tá ortanelte i pota-velunte i súrinna ar lender ana i hresta.

35 After saying these words he took a bread, gave thanks to God before them all, and broke it and began to eat. 36 Then they had joy, and they as well ate food. 37 Our total number on the ship was two hundred and seventy-six. 38 After eating the food that we wanted, we made the ship less heavy by throwing the grain into the sea.
	39 When day came, they did not know the land, but they saw a bay where [there] was a beach, and they wanted to bring the ship thither, if it was possible for them. 40 Therefore they cut away the anchors and let them fall into the sea, and at the same time they loosened the lashes of the rudder. Then they raised the forward sail towards the wind and went against the beach.

41 Íre lantanelte nómenna yanna ear pente yúyo tiello, tallelte i cirya talamenna. I lango náne tanca ar ua polde leve, mal i ciryo ponte náne rácina mir rantar ormenen i earo. 42 Tá i ohtari merner nahta i nútine neri, pustien aiquen uşiello *lutiénen oa. 43 Mal i *tuxantur merne tala Paulo varnassenna ar pustaner te cariello ya mernelte. Ar cannes in sinter *lute i capumnelte mir ear, rahtien norenna minyave. 44 I exi hilyaner, ennoli panolissen, ennoli natalissen i ciryallo. Ar sie illi náner talane varnave norenna. 

41 When they fell upon a place where the sea struck from both directions, they brought the ship onto ground. The prow was fixed and could not move, but the back of the ship was broken into pieces by the violence of the sea. 42 Then the soldiers wanted to kill the bound men, to stop anyone from escaping by swimming away. 43 But the centurion wished to bring Paul to safety and stopped them from doing what they wanted. And he commanded those that knew [how] to swim that they were to jump into the sea, in order to reach to land first. 44 The others followed, some on planks, some on things from the ship. And thus all were brought safely to land.

RANTA 28 
Apa rahtanelme varnassenna parnelme in i tollo esse náne Melite. 2 Ar i queni tasse, i quenter lambe ya ualme hanyane, lenganer menna lissenen han ya senwa ná, an nartanelte ruine ar camner me illi, castanen i ulo ya lantane, ar i ringiéno. 3 Mal íre Paulo hostane loxe olwennelíva ar panyane tai i ruinesse, leuca ettúle i úrenen ar tancexe máryanna. 4 Íre i queni tasse cenner i hloirea onna lingala máryallo, quentelte quén i exenna: “Tancave nér sina nahtar ná, ar ómu anes rehtana i earello, umbar ua láve sen coita.” 5 Mal palles i hloirea onna mir i ruine ar perpére munta olca. 6 Ono sannelte i pulumnes, hya i lantumnes rincanen qualina. Apa hopie andave ar cenie munta olca martala sen, vistanelte sámalta ar quenter i náse aino.
	7 Hare sana nómenna i tollo amminda nér, estaina Poplio, sáme restali. Camnes me mai ar nildave láve men mare coaryasse ter rí nelde. 8 Mal Poplio atar náne caimassea úrenen ar *hruhirdiénen. Paulo lende minna senna ar hyamne, panyane máryat sesse ar nestane se.

CHAPTER 28
After we reached safety we learnt that the name of the island was Melite [= Malta?]. 2 And the people there, who spoke a language that we did not understand, behaved towards us with kindness [lisse = grace, sweetness] beyond what is usual, for they kindled a fire and received us all, by reason of the rain that fell, and of the cold.
	3 But when Paul collected a bunch of sticks and put them on the fire, a snake came out because of the heat and fastened itself to his hand. 4 When the people there saw the venomous creature hanging from his hand, they said one to the other: “Surely this man is a murderer, and although he was saved from the sea, doom did not allow him to live.” 5 But he shook the venomous creature into the fire and suffered nothing bad. 6 But they thought that he was going to swell, or that suddenly he was going to fall dead. After waiting long and seeing nothing bad happening to him, they changed their mind and said that he was [Q: is] a god.
	7 Near to that place the most prominent man of the island, called Poplio [Publius], had some fields. He received us well and kindly allowed us to dwell in his house for [ter = through] three days. 8 But Poplio's father was bed-ridden with fever [úre: heat] and dystentery. Paul went in to him and prayed, put his hands on him and healed him.

9 Apa ta martane, i hyane queni i tollasse i sámer hlaiweli yú túler senna ar náner nestane. 10 Epeta yú *alcaryanelte me rimbe annalínen, ar íre cirnelme oa, antanelte men natali maurelmain.
	11 Apa astar nelde cirnelme oa ciryasse ya túle Alexandriallo. Termarnelyanes ter i hríve i tollasse, ar sámes i Onóni ve i langoemma. 12 Túlelme Siracusenna ar lemner tasse ter rí nelde. 13 Talo lendelme *os i falasse ar túler Rehiumenna, ar apa er ré enge súre hyarmello, ar tennelme Puteolisse mí attea ré. 14 Tasse hirnelme hánoli i arcaner i lemyumnelme aselte ter rí otso, ar sie túlelme mir Róma. 15 Ar talo i hánor, íre hlasselte i sinyar pa me, túler me-velien tenna Forum Appii ar i *Sendassi Nelde. Paulo, cenila te, antane hantale Erun ar sáme huore.

9 After that happened, the other people on the island that had illnesses also came to him and were healed. 10 Thereafter they also glorified us with numerous gifts, and when we sailed away, they gave us things for our needs.
	11 After three months we sailed away on a ship that came from Alexandria. It had remained through the winter on the island, and it had the Twins as the figurehead [lango-emma: prow-image]. 12 We came to Syracus and remained there for [ter = through] three days. 13 From there we went aroud the coast and came to Rhegium, and after one day [there] was a wind from the south, and we arrived in Puteoli on the second day. 14 There we found brothers who requested that we would stay with them for seven days, and thus we came into Rome. 15 And from there the brothers, when they heard the news about us, came to see us as far as Forum Appii and the Three Taverns. Paul, seeing them, gave thanks to God and had courage.

	16 Íre lendelme mir Róma náne lávina Paulon mare vérave, as i ohtar tirila se. 17 Mal apa rí nelde yaldes i náner imíca i minde neri i Yúraron. Apa ocomnelte quentes téna: “Neri, hánor, ómu fcarnen munta ana i lie hya i haimi atarilvaron, inye náne antana olla Yerúsalemello mannar Rómearon. 18 Té, apa carie ceşie, merner lerya ni, pan ua enge cáma valda qualmeo nisse. 19 Mal íre i Yúrar quenter ana ta, mauyane nin panya nattonya epe i Ingaran – mal lá ve au samin *aiqua ulca quetien ana nórenya. 20 Casta sinanen etta arcanen le-vele ar quete lenna, an castanen i estelo Israélo cólan limil sina.” 21 Quentelte senna: “Ualme acámier mentar pa lyé Yúreallo; ente, *úquen i hánoron i utúlier equétie *aiqua olca pa lye. 22 Mal sanalme i vanima ná hlare lyello mana sanwelyar nar, an é istalme pa heren sina i mi ilya nóme mo quete ana sa.”

16 When we came into Rome [it] was permitted to Paul to dwell privately, with the soldier watching him. 17 But after three days he summoned [those] who were among the prominent men of the Jews. After they assembled he said to them: “Men, brothers, though I did nothing against the people or the customs from our fathers, I was given over from Jerusalem into [the] hands of [the] Romans. 18 They, after making an inquiry, wished to free me, since [there] was not [any] guilt worthy of death in me. 19 But when the Jews spoke against that, it was necessary for me to put my case before the High King – but not as if I have anything evil to say against my nation. 20 For this reason I therefore requested to see you and to speak to you, for by reason of the hope of Israel I am carrying this chain.” 21 They said to him: “We have not received letters about you from Judea; furthermore; no one of the brothers that have come have said anything bad about you. 22 But we think it is proper to hear from you what your thoughts are, for indeed we know about this sect [heren, order] that in every place one speaks against it.”

	23 Tancelte aure yasse velumneltes ar túler yanna marnes, rimbe lá ya anelte mí minya lú. Arinello şinyenna nyarnes ar *vettanes tien pa Eruo aranie, ar i Şanyello ar i Erutercánollon néves anta tien hande pa Yésus. 24 Ennoli mici te lastaner quettaryannar, mal exeli loitaner save. 25 Pan anelte şance oantelte, mal Paulo quente téna erya quetie: “Nanwave i Aire Fea carampe atarildannar ter Yesaia i Erutercáno, 26 quetila: 'Mena lie sinanna ar queta: É hlaruvalde, mal laume hanyuvalde; ar é yétuvalde, mal laume cenuvalde. 27 An lie sino enda olólie ilaica, ar hlarultat nát lunge hlariéno, ar hendultat apahtielte – te-pustala tuntiello hendultanten ar hlariello hlarultanten ar haniello endaltanen ar hiriello inwis, nestienyan te.' 28 Etta, nai nauva sinwa len i rehtie sina anaie mentana i nórennar; té yú hlaruvar.” 29 Ar apa quentes quettar sine, i Yúrar oanter, arwe túra costo mici inte.
	30 Tá termarnes loa attasse mí coa yasse paityanes marien, ar camnes illi i túler senna, 31 carila Eruo aranie sinwa ar peantala pa i Heru Yésus Hristo ilya veriénen, pen aiquen pustala se.

	23 They fixed a day when they were going to see him and came to where he lived, more numerous than they were the first time. From morning to evening he told and witnessed to them about God's kingdom, and from the Law and from the prophets he tried to give them understanding about Jesus. 24 Some among them listened to his words, but others failed to believe. 25 Since they were split they went away, but Paul said a single saying to them: “Truly the Holy Spirit spoke to your fathers through Isaiah the Prophet, 26 saying: 'Go to this people and say: Indeed you will hear, but you will by no means understand, and indeed you will look, but you will by no means see. 27 For the heart of this people has become blunt, and their ears are heavy of hearing, and their eyes they have closed – stopping them from perceiving with their eyes and from hearing with their ears and from understanding with their heart and from finding repentance [inwis: change of mind], for me to heal them.' 28 Therefore, may it be known to you that this salvation has been sent to the nations; they will also hear.” 29 And after he said these words, the Jews went away, having a great dispute among themselves.
	30 Then he remained for two years in the house where he paid to live, and he received all that came to him, 31 making God's kingdom known and teaching about the Lord Jesus Christ with all boldness, without anyone stopping him.
