Evandilyon Yoháno
Gospel of John
Revision of March 2022

RANTA 1  
I yestasse enge i Quetta, ar i Quetta enge as Eru, ar i Quetta né Eru. 2 Isse enge i yestasse as Eru. 3 Ilqua náne ontana sénen, ar hequa sénen erya nat úne ontana. Ya náne ontana 4 sénen coivie né, ar i coivie náne Atanion cala. 5 Ar i cala calta i morniesse, mal i mornie ua utúruye sa. 
	6 Oronte nér mentana lo Eru; esserya náne Yoháno. 7 Isse túle *vettien, i *vettuvas pa i cala, in ilye atani savuvar sénen. 8 Lá anes cala sina, mal *vettumnes pa cala sina.
	9 I nanwa cala, caltala ilye atanin, túlane mir i mar. 10 Enges i mardesse, ar i mar náne ontana sénen, mal i mar ua sinte se. 11 Túles i véranna, mal véraryar uar camne se. 12 Mal illi i é se-camner, tien antanes hére náven hínar Eruo, an sámelte savie esseryasse; 13 ar anelte nóne, lá sercenen hya hrávenen hya nero şelmanen, mal Erunen. 
	14 Ar i Quetta olle hráve ar marne imíca me, ar cennelme alcarerya, taite alcar ya *ernóna yondo same ataryallo, ar anes quanta Erulisseo ar nanwiéno. 15 Yoháno *vettane pa se, é etyámes: “Nér sina ná i quén pa ye quenten: Ye túle cata ni ea sí opo ni, pan enges nó ni.” 16 An camnelme illi et quantieryallo, lisse or lisse. 17 An i Şanye náne antana ter Móses, mal i lisse ar i nanwie túler ter Yésus Hristo. 18 Eru *úquen oi ecénie; i *ernóna Yondo ye ea i Ataro súmasse acárie se sinwa. 

Gospel of John
CHAPTER 1
In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. 2 He was in the beginning with God. 3 Everything was created by means of him, and except by him not a single thing was created. [That] which was created 4 by him was life, and the life was the light of men. 5 And the light shines in the darkness, but the darkness has not conquered it.
6 [There] arose a man sent by God; his name was John [or, Johannes]. 7 He came for a witness, that he was to  [Q: will] witness about the light, that all men were going to [Q: will] believe by means of him. 8 He was not this light, but he was to witness about this light.
9 The true light, shining for all men, was coming into the world. 10 He was in the world, and the world was created by him, but the world did not know him. 11 He came to his own, but his own did not receive him. 12 But all who did receive him, to them he gave authority to be children of God, for they had faith in his name; 13 and they were born, not by blood or by flesh or by man’s will, but by God.
14 And the Word became flesh and dwelt among us, and we saw his glory, such glory as an only-born son has from his father; and he was full of grace and truth. 15 John witnessed about him; indeed he cried out: “This man is the one of whom I said: [He] who comes behind me is now in front of me, since he existed before me.” 16 For we all received out of his fullness, grace over grace. 17 For the Law was given through Moses, but the grace and the truth came through Jesus Christ. 18 God nobody has ever seen; the only-born Son who is in the Father’s bosom has made him known.

	19 Si Yoháno *vettie ná íre i Yúrar mentaner *airimóli ar Levindeli Yerúsalemello maquetien senna: “Man nalye?” 20 Ar carampes pantave ar ua lalane, mal quente pantave: “Uan i Hristo.” 21 Ar maquentelte senna: “Tá mana? Ma nalye Elía?” Ar eques: “Uan.” “Ma nalye i Erutercáno?” Ar hanquentes: “Lá!” 22 Etta quentelte senna: “Man nalye? Lava men same hanquenta in mentaner me. Mana quetil pa imle?” 23 Eques: “Nanye óma yamila i ravandasse: Cara i Héruo malle téra! – tambe Yesaia i Erutercáno quente.” 24 I mentanar náner i Farisaron. 25 Ar maquentelte ar quenter senna: “Tá mana i casta yanen sumbal, qui ual i Hristo hya Elía hya i Erutercáno?” 26 Yoháno hanquente ar eque: “Inye sumba nennen; endeldasse quén tára ye elde uar ista, 27 ye túla cata ni, mal inye ua valda lehtien i latta hyapatyo.” 28 Nati sine martaner Vetaniasse Yordan pella, yasse Yoháno sumbane.
	29 I hilyala auresse cennes Yésus túla senna, ar eques: “Ela Eruo Eule ye mapa oa i mardo úcare! 30 Isse ná i quén pa ye quenten: Yé! Túla nér ye sí opo ni ea, an nó ni enges. 31 Inye ua sinte se, mal túlen sumbala nennen in isse nauva apantana Israélen.” 32 Yoháno yú *vettane, quetila: “Cennen i Faire túla undu et menello ve cucua, ar lemnes to sé. 33 Ar inye ua sinte se, mal ye ni-mentane sumbien nennen quente ninna: I quén yenna cenuval i Faire túla undu ve cucua, isse ná ye sumba Aire Feanen. 34 Ar inye ecénie sa, ar *evettien in isse i Eruion ná.” 

	19 This is the witness of John when the Jews sent some priests and Levites from Jerusalem to inquire of him: “Who are you?” 20 And he spoke openly and did not deny [it], but said openly: “I am not the Christ.” 21 And they asked him: “Then what? Are you Elijah?” And he said: “I am not.” “Are you the Prophet?” And he answered: “No!” 22 Therefore they said to him: “Who are you? Let us have an answer for those who sent us. What do you say about yourself?” 23 He said: “I am a voice crying in the desert: Make the Lord’s way straight! – as Isaiah the Prophet said.” 24 The ones sent [forth] were of the Pharisees. 25 And they asked and said to him: “Then what is the reason that [yanen, “by which”]  you baptize, if you are not the Christ or Elijah or the Prophet?” 26 John answered and said: “I baptize with water; in your midst one is standing whom you do not know, 27 [the one] who comes after me, but I am not worthy to loosen the strap of his shoe." 28 These things happened in Bethany [Betania] beyond the Jordan, where John was baptizing.
	29 On the following day he saw Jesus come to him, and he said: “Behold God’s Lamb who takes away the world’s sin! 30 He is the one of whom I said: Look! A man is coming who is now in front of me, for before me he existed. 31  I did not know him, but I came baptizing with water [so] that he was to be revealed to Israel.” 32 John also witnessed, saying: “I saw the Spirit come down out of heaven as a dove, and it remained on him. 33 And I did not know him, but [he] who sent me to baptize with water said to me: The one to whom you shall see the Spirit come down as a dove, he is [the one] who baptizes with Holy Spirit. 34 And I have seen it, and I have witnessed that he is the Son of God.”

	35 I hilyala auresse Yoháno ata tarne as atta hildoryaron, 36 ar cenila Yésus vantala eques: “Ela Eruo Eule!” 37 Ar i hildo atta hlasset se quéta, ar hilyanette Yésus. 38 Mal Yésus quernexe ar cenne tú hilyala, ar quentes túna: “Mana cestaste?” Tú quentet senna: “Ravi” – ya tea *Peantar – “masse máral?” 39 Eques túna: “Tula ar cena!” Etta túlette ar cennet i nóme yasse marnes, ar lemnette óse aure yanasse. Náne *os i quainea lúme. 40 Andréas, hánorya Símon Péter, náne quén i hildo atto *yet hlasset ya Yoháno quente ar hilyanet Yésus. 41 Isse hirne minyave véra hánorya, Símon, ar eque senna: “Ihíriemme Messías” – ya tea Hristo. 42 Se-tulyanes Yésunna. Íre Yésus se-cenne eques: “Elye Símon yondorya Yoháno ná. Elye nauva estaina Céfas” – ya tea Péter (Ondo). 
	43 I hilyala auresse mernes mene Alileanna. Yésus hirne Filip ar quente senna: “Áni hilya!” 44 Filip náne Vetsairallo, Andreas ar Pétero osto. 45 Filip hirne Natanael ar quente senna: “Ihírielme i quén pa ye Móses i Şanyesse ar i Erutercánor tencer: Yésus Yosefion Nasaretello.” 46 Mal eque senna Natanael: “Ma mára nat pole tule Nasaretello?” 47 Yésus cenne Natanael túla senna ar quente pa se: “Ela nanwa Israelinde, yesse lá ea *vartie!” 48 Eque senna Natanael: “Manen elye ista ní?” Yésus hanquente ar eque: “Nó Filip yalde lye, íre engel nu i *relyávalda, lye-cennen.” 49 Natanael hanquente senna: “Ravi, elye ná i Eruion, elye ná i Aran Israélo!” 50 Yésus hanquente ar eque: “Pan anyárien lyen i cennen lye nu i *relyávalda savil? Cenuval nati túre lá ta.” 51 Ar eques téna: “Násie, násie quetin lenna: Cenuvalde menel latyana ar Eruo valar ména ama ar undu i Atanyondosse.”

	35 On the following day John again stood [forth] with two of his disciples, 36 and seeing Jesus walking he said: “Behold God’s Lamb!” 37 And the two disciples heard him speak, and they [-tte, dual]  followed Jesus. 38 But Jesus turned [Q: turned himself] and saw them [tú, dual] follow, and he said to them: “What do you [-ste, dual]  seek?” They said to him: “Rabbi” – which means teacher – “where are you staying?” 39 He said to them: “Come and see!” Therefore they came and saw the place where he stayed, and they remained with him on that day. [It] was around the tenth hour. 40 Andrew [Andreas], the brother of Simon Peter, was one of the two disciples who [*yet, dual] heard [that] which John said and followed Jesus. 41 He found first his own brother, Simon, and said to him: “We [-mme, dual] have found [the] Messiah!” – which means Christ. 42 He led him to Jesus. When Jesus saw him he said: “You are Simon son of John. You will be called Cephas” – which means Peter [= Rock].
	43 On the following day he wanted to go to Galilee [Galilea]. Jesus found Philip and said to him: “Follow me!” 44 Philip was from Bethsaida, the city of Andrew and Peter. 45 Philip found Nathanael and said to him: “We have found the one of whom Moses in the Law and the Prophets wrote: Jesus son of Joseph from Nazareth.” 46 But Nathanael said to him: “Can a good thing come from Nazareth?” 47 Jesus saw Nathanael come to him and said of him: “Behold a true Israelite, in whom there is no deceit [vartie, betrayal]!” 48 Nathanael said to him: “How do you know me?” Jesus answered and said: “Before Philip called you, when you were under the fig tree, I saw you.” 49 Nathanael answered him: “Rabbi, you are the Son of God, you are the King of Israel!” 50 Jesus answered and said: “Since I told you that I saw you under the fig tree you believe? You will see some things greater than that.” 51 And he said to them: “Truly, truly I say to you: You will see heaven opened and God’s angels go up and down on the Son of Man.”

RANTA 2 
I neldea auresse enge veryanwe Cánasse Alileo, ar Yésuo amil náne tasse. 2 Yú Yésus ar hildoryar náner nahamne i veryanwenna.
	3 Íre ualte sáme amba limpe Yésuo amil quente senna: “Pénalte limpe.” 4 Mal quente senna Yésus: “Nís, mana samin asetye? Lúmenya en ua utúlie.” 5 Amillerya quente innar *veuyaner: “Cara ilqua ya quetis lenna!” 6 Tarner tasse calpar enque, ve i şanyer sovalleo Yúraron; ilya calpa polde mapa lestar atta hya nelde. 7 Eque téna Yésus: “Quata i calpar nennen!” Ar quanteltet penquante. 8 Ar eques téna: “Á calpa sallo ar ása mapa i *merenturenna!” Sie nampeltes. 9 Mal íre i *merentur tyáve i nén, ya náne vistana mir limpe, mal ua sinte yallo túles – ómu i *veuyaner sinter – i *merentur yalde i ender 10 ar eque senna: “Ilya hyana nér etepanya minyave i mára limpe, ar íre queni nar *limpunque, i urra. Elye asátie i mára limpe tenna sí.” 11 Yésus carne si Cánasse Alileo ve i yesta tanwaryaron ar apantane alcarerya, ar hildoryar sáver sesse. 

CHAPTER 2
On the third day [there] was a wedding in Cana of Galilee, and Jesus’ mother was there. 2 Also Jesus and his disciples were invited [or “summoned”]  to the wedding.
	2 When they did not have more wine Jesus’ mother said to him: “They are lacking wine.” 4 But Jesus said to her: “Woman, what do I have [to do] with you? My hour still has not come.” 5 His mother said to those who served: “Do everything that he says to you!” 6 [There] stood there six water-vessels, according to the laws of purification of [the] Jews; each water-vessel could take two or three measures. 7 Jesus said to them: “Fill the water-vessels with water!” And they filled them brim full. 8 And he said to them: “Draw [some] from it and take it to the leader of the feast!” So they took it. 9 But when the leader of the feast tasted the water, which was changed into wine, but he did not know where it came from – though the ones who served knew – the leader of the feast called the bridegroom 10 and said to him: “Every other man first puts forth the good wine, and when people are drunk, the inferior. You have put aside  the good wine until now.” 11 Jesus did this in Cana of Galilee as the beginning of his signs and revealed his glory, and his disciples believed in him.

	12 Epeta isse ar amillerya ar hánoryar ar hildoryar ununter Capernaumenna, mal ualte lemne tasse ter rimbe réli.
13 Sí Yúraron Lahtie hare né, ar Yésus lende ama Yerúsalemenna. 14 Ar hirnes i cordasse i vancer mondor ar mámar ar cucuar ar i *quaptari hammaltassen. 15 Apa carie *ripil *rappalíva, hanteset illi ettenna as i mámar ar mondor; et-ulyanes i tyelpemittar i *quaptariva ar nuquerne i sarnor. 16 Ar innar vancer cucuar eques: “Á mapa nati sine oa sio! Áva care i coa Atarinyava coa mancaleo!” 17 Hildoryar enyalder i ná técina: “I uryala felme coalyan ammatuva ni.” 
	18 Tá i Yúrar quenter senna: “Mana i tanwa ya tanuval men, pan caril nati sine?” 19 Yésus hanquente ar eque: “Nancara corda sina, ar mi rí nelde enortauvanyes.” 20 Etta i Yúrar quenter: “Corda sina náne carastana ter loar enque *canaquean, ar elye enortauva sá mi rí nelde?” 21 Mal isse carampe pa i corda hroaryava. 22 Sie, apa anes ortana et qualinallon, hildoryar enyalder i quentes si, ar sávelte ya i Tehtele quete ar i quetta ya Yésus quente.
	23 Mal íre enges Yerúsalemesse i Lahtiesse, i aşaresse, rimbali sáver esseryasse, pan cennelte i tanwar yar carnes. 24 Ono Yésus immo ua pantane endarya tien, pan sinteset illi, ar pan uas sáme maure in aiquen *vettuva pa atan, an isse sinte ya enge i atande.

	12 Thereafter he and his mother and his disciples went down to Capernaum, but he did not remain there for [ter “through”] many days.
	13 Now [the] Jews’ Passover was near, and Jesus went up to Jerusalem. 14 And he found in the temple those who sold oxen and sheep and doves and the money-changers on their seats. 15 After making a whip of some ropes, he threw them all out together with the sheep and oxen; he poured out the coins [tyelpemittar “silver pieces”]  of the money-changers and overturned the tables. 16 And to those who sold doves he said: “Take these things away from here! Do not make the house of my Father a house of commerce!” 17 The disciples recalled that [it] is written: “The burning feeling for your house will devour me .”
	18 Then the Jews said to him: “What is the sign that you will show us, since you do these things?” 19 Jesus answered and said: “Destroy [nancara, “undo”] this temple, and in three days I will raise it up.” 20 Therefore the Jews said: “This temple was built over [ter “through] forty-six years, and you will raise it up in three days?” 21 But he talked about the temple of his body. 22 Thus, after he was raised from [the] dead, his disciples recalled that he said this, and they believed what the Scripture says and the word that Jesus spoke.
	23 But when he was in Jerusalem at the Passover, at the festival, numerous ones believed in his name, since they saw the signs that he did. 24 But Jesus himself did not open his heart to them, for he knew them all, and because he did not have [any] need that anyone was to witness about a man, for he knew what was in the man. 

RANTA 3 
Enge nér i Farisaron; esserya náne Nicorémus, ingwe Yúraron. 2 Nér sina túle senna i lómisse ar eque senna: “Rappi, istalme i nalye *peantar túlienwa Erullo, an ea *úquen ye pole care tanwar sine qui Eru ua óse.” 3 Yésus hanquente ar eque senna: “Násie, násie quetin lyenna, qui aiquen ua nóna ata, uas pole cene Eruo aranie.” 4 Eque senna Nicorémus: “Manen quén pole náve nóna íre náse yára? Ma polis nanwene amilleryo mónanna náven nóna ata?” 5 Yésus hanquente: “Násie, násie quetin lyenna, qui aiquen ua nóna nennen ar fairenen, uas pole tule mir Eruo aranie. 6 Ya nóna ná hrávenen hráve ná, ar ya nóna ná fairenen faire ná. 7 Áva tatalla pan quenten lyenna: Mauya len náve nóna ata. 8 I súre surya yasse meris, ar hlaril lammarya, mal ual ista yallo tulis hya yanna lelyas. Sie ilquen ná ye anaie nóna i fairenen.”
	9 Nicorémus hanquente ar eque senna: “Manen nati sine polir marta?” 10 Yésus hanquente ar eque senna: “Ma elye *peantar Israélo ná  ar ual ista nati sine? 11 Násie, násie quetin lyenna, ya istalme quetilme ar ya ecénielme *vettalme, mal ualde came *vettielma. 12 Qui anyárien len pa i nati cemeno ar ualde save, manen savuvalde qui nyarin len pa i nati menelo? 13 Ente, *úquen eménie ama menelenna hequa ye utúlie undu menello, i Atanyondo. 14 Ar tambe Móses ortane i leuca i erumasse, síve mauya i Atanyondon náve ortana, 15 in ilquen ye save sesse samuva oira coivie. 
	16 An sie Eru emélie i mar, in antanes *ernóna Yondorya, in ilquen ye save hesse lá nauva nancarna, mal samuva oira coivie. 17 An Eru mentane Yondorya, lá namieryan i mar, mal i rehtien i mardeva hénen. 18 Ye save hesse lá nauva námina. Ye ua save anaie námina yando sí, pan uas asávie mí esse i *ernóna Eruiono. 19 Ar si i námie ná, in i cala utúlie mir i mar, mal Atani méler i mornie or i cala, an cardaltar nar ulce. 20 An ye care şaure nati yelta i cala ar ua mere tule i calanna, i cardaryar lá nauvar naityane. 21 Mal ye é care ya nanwa ná tule i calanna, i nauva apantana i cardaryar nar cárine Erusse.”

CHAPTER 3
There was a man of the Pharisees; his name was Nicodemus, a ruler of [the] Jews. 2 This man came to him in the night and said to him: “Rabbi, we know that you are a teacher come from God, for [there] is nobody who can do these signs if God is not with him.” 3 Jesus answered and said to him: “Truly, truly I say to you, if anyone is not born again, he cannot see God’s kingdom.” 4 Nicodemus said to him: “How can a person be born when he is old? Can he return to his mother’s womb to be born again?” 5 Jesus answered: “Truly, truly I say to you, if anybody is not born by water and by spirit, he cannot come into God’s kingdom. 6 What is born by flesh is flesh, and what is born by spirit is spirit. 7 Do not wonder because I said to you:  You [pl] must be born again. 8 The wind blows where it wants, and you [sg.]  hear the sound of it, but you do not know where it comes from or where it is goes to. So is eveyrone who has been born by the spirit.”
	9 Nicodemus answered and said to him: “How can these things happen?” 10 Jesus answered and said to him: “Are you Israel’s teacher and you do not know these things? 11 Truly, truly I say to you [sg.], what we know we speak and what we have seen we witness [about], but you [pl.] do not receive our witness. 12 If I have told you [pl.] about the things of earth and you do not believe, how will you believe if I tell you about the things of heaven? 13 Furthermore, nobody has gone up to heaven except [he] who has come down from heaven, the Son of Man. 14 And as Moses lifted up the serpent in the desert, so [it] is necessary for the Son of Man to be lifted up, 15 that everybody who believes in him will have eternal life.
	16 For so God has loved the world, that he gave his only-born Son, that everyone who believes in that one shall not be destroyed, but shall have eternal life. 17 For God sent his Son, not for him to judge the world, but for the salvation of the world by that one. 18 [He] who believes in that one shall not be judged. [He] who does not believe has been judged even now, since he has not believed in the name of the only-born Son of God. 19 And this is the judgment, that the light has come into the world, but Men loved the darkness over the light, for their deeds [/works] are evil. 20 And [he] who does foul things hates the light and does not want to come to the light, [so] that his deeds will not be reproved. 21 But [he] who indeed does what is true comes to the light, [so] that [it] will be manifest that his deeds are done in God.”

	22 Apa nati sine Yésus ar hildoryar lender i Yúrea ménanna, ar tasse lemnes aselte ar sumbane. 23 Yoháno sumbane mi Ainon, har Salimenna, pan enge úve nenwa tasse, ar queni túler ar náner sumbane, 24 an Yoháno en úne hátina mir mando. 
	25 Tá enge costie imbi Yohanneo hildor as Yúra pa sovalle. 26 Ar túlelte Yohannenna ar quenter senna: “Ravi, i nér ye enge aselye han Yordan, pa ye *vettanel, yé! isse sumba ar illi ménar senna.” 27 Yoháno hanquente ar eque: “Atan ua pole came erya nat qui ta ui antana sen menello. 28 Elde inde *vettar nin i quenten: Inye ua i Hristo, mal nanye mentana opo sé. 29 Ye same i indis i ender ná. Mal i endero meldo, íre taris hlarila se, same túra alasse íre hlaris i endero óma. Sie sina alassenya quanta ná. 30 Isse aláluva, mal inye fifírúva.”
	31 Ye tule táriello ea or ilye exi. Ye cemeno ná cemello ná, ar quetis pa i nati cemeno. Ye tule menello ea or ilye exi.  32 Ya ecénies ar ahláries, pa ta *vettas, mal *úquen came *vettierya. 33 Ye acámie *vettierya apánie *lihtarya i voronwesse Eruo. 34 An ye Eru mentane quete Eruo quetier, an uas anta i Faire lestanen. 35 I Atar mele i Yondo ar ánie ilye nati máryanna. 36 Ye save i Yondosse same oira coivie; ye ua care ve i Yondo quete ua cenuva coivie, mal Eruo rúşe lemya sesse.

	22 After these things Jesus and his disciples went to the Judean region, and there he remained with them and baptized. 23 John was baptizing in Aenon, near to Salim, since [there] was an abundance of water there, and people came and were baptized, 24 for John still was not [= had not yet been] thrown into prison.
	25 Then there was a quarrel between John’s disciples with a Jew concerning purification. 26 And they came to John and said to him: “Rabbi, the man who was with you beyond [the] Jordan, about whom you witnessed, look! he is baptizing and all are going to him.” 27 John answered and said: “A man cannot receive a single thing if it that is not given him from heaven. 28 You yourselves witness to me that I said: I am not the Christ, but I am sent in front of him. 29 [He] who has the bride is the bridegroom. But the bridegroom’s friend, when he stands hearing him, has great joy when he hears the bridegroom’s voice. Thus this joy of mine is full. 30 He will keep growing, but I will fade away.”
	31 [He] who comes from on high is over all others. [He] who is of earth is from earth, and he speaks of the things of earth. [He] who comes from heaven is over all others. 32 What he has seen and he has heard, about that he witnesses, but no one receives his witness. 33 [He] who has received his witness has put his seal on the faithfulness of God. 34 For [he] whom God sent speaks God’s sayings, for he does not give the Spirit by measure. 35 The Father loves the Son and has given all things into his hand. 36 [He] who believes in the Son has eternal life; [he] who does not do as the Son says will not see life, but God’s wrath remains upon him.

RANTA 4  
Íre i Heru sinte in i Farisar ahlárier i Yésus cára ar sumba hildor rimbe lá i hildor Yoháno  – 2 ómu Yésus ua sumbane, mal hildoryar carner – 3 oantes Yúreallo ar lende ata Alileanna. 4 Mal mauyane sen lelya ter Samária. 5 Etta túles ostonna Samário estaina Sícar, hare i restanna ya Yácov antane Yósef yondoryan. 6 Tasse enge Yácovo ehtele. Sie Yésus, lumba i lendanen, hamune ara i ehtele. I lúme náne *os i enquea.
	7 Nís Samáriallo túle calpien. Yésus quente senna: “Ánin anta yulda.” 8 An hildoryar náner ménienwe mir i osto mancien inten matta. 9 Etta i nís Samáriallo quente senna: “Manen elye, ye Yúra ná, arca yulda nillo ye Samárea nís ná?” An Yúrar ar Samárear samir munta uo. 10 Yésus hanquente ar eque senna: “Au sintel Eruo anna ar i nasse yeo quéta lyenna: Ánin anta yulda, elye arcane sello, ar antanes lyen coirea nén.” 
	11 Eques senna: “Heru, ual same calpa, ar i tampo núra ná. Mallo, tá, samil i coirea nén? 12 Lau elye ná túra lá Yácov aterelma, ye antane men i tampo ar ye immo sunce sallo as yondoryar ar celvaryar?” 13 Yésus hanquente ar eque senna: “Ilquen ye suce nén sino nauva soica ata. 14 Aiquen ye suce i neno ya inye antauva sen laume nauva soica, mal i nén ya inye antauva sen nauva sesse ehtele nenwa ya orta amba mir oira coivie.” 15 I nís quente senna: “Heru, ánin anta nén sina, i lá nauvan soica ar lá mauyuva nin tule sinomenna calpien.”

CHAPTER 4
When the Lord knew that the Pharisees had heard [Q: has heard] that Jesus was making and baptized [Q: is making and baptizes] disciples more numerous than the disciples of John – 2 though Jesus did not baptize, but his disciples did – 3 he went away from Judea and went again to Galilee. 4 But [it] was necessary for him to go through Galilee. 5 Therefore he came to a city of Samaria called Sychar, near to the field that Jacob gave to his son Joseph. 6 There was Jacob’s spring. Thus Jesus, tired by the journey, sat down by the spring. The hour was around the sixth.
	7 A woman from Samaria came to draw water. Jesus said to her: “Give me a drink.” 8 For his disciples were gone into the city to buy [lit. trade to themselves] food. 9 Therefore the woman from Samaria said to him: “How do you, who are a Jew, ask for a drink from me who is a Samaritan woman?” For Jews and Samaritans have nothing together. 10 Jesus answered and said to her: “If you knew God’s gift and [the] true-being of [him] who is saying to you: Give me a drink, you asked him, and he gave you living water.”
	11 She said to him: “Lord, you have no water-vessel, and the well is deep. From where, then, do you have the living water? 12 Surely you are not greater than Jacob our father, who gave us the well and who himself drank from it with his sons and his animals?” 13 Jesus answered and said to her: “Everyone who drinks of this water shall be thirsty again. 14 Whoever drinks of the water that I will give him will by no means be thirsty, but the water that I will give him will be in him a spring of water that rises up into eternal life.” 15  The woman said to him: “Lord, give me this water, that I will not be thirsty and [it] will not be necessary for me to come here to draw water.”

16 Eques senna: “Mena, yala verulya ar tula sir!” 17 I nís hanquente ar eque: “Uan same veru.” Eque senna Yésus: “Quentel mai: Veru uan same. 18 An asámiel veruvi lempe, ar ye samil sí ua verulya. Pa nat sina quentel i nanwie.” 19 I nís quente senna: “Heru, cenin in elye Erutercáno ná. 20 Atarilmar antaner tyerme oron sinasse, mal elde quetir i Yerúsalem i vanima nóme ná antáven tyerme.” 21 Eque senna Yésus: “Sava quetienya, nís: I lúme túla yasse ualde antauva tyerme i Ataren oron sinasse hya Yerúsalemesse véla .
 22 Elde antar tyerme yan ualde ista; elme antar tyerme yan istalme, an rehtie tule Yúrallon. 23 Mal i lúme túla, ar eas sí, yasse i nanwe *tyerindor antauvar tyerme i Atar fairenen ar nanwiénen, an taiti *tyerindor i Atar cesta. 24 Eru faire ná, ar mauya in se-*tyerir anta tyerme fairenen ar nanwiénen.” 25 I nís quente senna: “Istan i túla Messías, ye estaina Hristo ná. Quiquie isse tuluva, nyaruvas men ilqua.” 26 Eque senna Yésus: “Inye ye quéta aselye ná sé.”
27 Sí hildoryar nanwenner, ar tatallanelte pan carampes as nís; ananta *úquen quente: “Mana cestal?” hya “Mana i casta yanen quétal óse?” 28 Sie i nís hehtane calparya ar oante mir i osto ar quente i queninnar: 29 “Tula sir, cena nér ye anyárie nin ilqua ya acárien! Cé sé i Hristo ná?” 30 Lendelte et i ostollo ar túler senna.
31 I imya lúmesse i hildor hortaner se, quétala: “Ravi, mata.” 32 Mal sé quente téna: “Samin matta matien ya elde uar ista.” 33 Etta i hildor quenter, quén i exenna: “Ma aiquen talle senna nat matien?” 34 Eque téna Yésus: “Mattanya ná in inye care i indóme yeo ni-mentane ar telya molierya. 35 Ma ualde quete in ear en astar canta nó i yávie tule? Yé! Quetin lenna: Á orta henduldat ar á yéta i restar, i nalte ninqui comyáven i yávie. Yando sí 36 ye rende cáma *paityalerya ar comyea yáve oira coivien, in ye *cerihta ar ye rende polir same alasse uo. 37 An sís eques sina nanwa ná: Quén erérie ar exe *cirihtea. 38 Inye mentane le *cirihtien ya ualde omólie. Exeli omólier, ar elde imittier mir molielta.”

16 He said to her: “Go, call your husband and come here!” 17 The woman answered and said: “I do not have a husband.” Jesus said to her: “You spoke well: A husband I do not have. 18 For you have had five husbands, and [the one] whom you have now is not your husband, Of this thing you spoke the truth.” 19 The woman said to him: “Lord, I see that you are a prophet. 20 Our fathers gave worship on this mountain, but you [pl.]  say that Jerusalem is the proper place for giving worship.” 21 Jesus said to her: “Believe my word, woman: The hour is coming when you [pl.] will not give worship on this mountain or in Jerusalem alike. 22 You give worship to what you do not know; we give worship to what we know, for salvation comes from [the] Jews. 23 But the hour is coming, and it is now, when the true worshippers will worship the father with spirit and with truth, for such worshippers the Father seeks. 24 God is a spirit, and [it] is necessary for [those] who worship him to worship with spirit and with truth.” 25 The woman said to him: “I know that [the] Messiah is coming, [he] who is called Christ. Whenever he shall come, he will tell us everything.” 26 Jesus said to her: “I who am speaking with you am he.”
27 Now his disciples returned, and they wondered because he spoke [/was speaking] with a woman; and yet nobody said: “What do you seek?” or “For what reason are you speaking with her?” [Mana i casta yanen… “what is the reason by which…”] 28 Thus the woman abandoned her water-vessel and went away into the city and said to the people: 29 “Come here, see a man who has told me everything that I have done! Maybe he is the Christ?” 30 They went out of the city and came to him.
31 At the same time the disciples urged him, saying: “Rabbi, eat.” 32 But he said to them: “I have food to eat that you do not know.” 33 Therefore the disiciples said, one to the other: “Did anybody bring him [some]thing to eat?” 34 Jesus said to them: “My food is that I do the will of [him] who sent me and complete his work. 35 Do you not say that [there] are still four months before the harvest comes? Look! I say to you: Raise your eyes and behold the fields, that they are white for gathering the harvest. Even now 36 he who sowed is receiving his reward and is gathering produce [or “fruit”, yáve] for eternal life, [so] that he who reaps and he who sowed can have joy together. 37 For here this proverb is true: One has sown and another is reaping. 38 I sent you to reap [that] which you have not worked [on]. Others have worked, and you have entered into their work.”

	39 Ar sana ostosse rimbali i Samárearon sáver sesse i quettanen i nisso ye *vettane: “Nyarnes nin ilqua ya carnen.” 40 Etta, ire i Samárear túler senna, arcanelte sello lemie aselte; ar lemnes tasse ter ré atta. 41 Ar an rimbali sáver yanen quentes, 42 ar quentelte i nissenna: “Ualme ambe save quetielyanen, an imme ahlárielmes, ar istalme i nér sina nanwave i *rehtar i mardo ná.”
	43 Apa i aure atta oantes talo Alileanna. 44 Mal Yésus immo *vettane i véra nómeryasse Erutercáno ua same laitie. 45 Sie, íre túles Alileanna, i queni Alileo camner se, pan anelte céniéla ilye i nati yar carnes Yerúsalemesse i aşaresse, an yú té lender i aşarenna.
46 Sie túles ata Cánanna Alileo, yasse vistanes i nén mir limpe. Ar enge arandur yeo yondo náne hlaiwa Capernaumesse. 47 Íre nér sina hlasse i Yésus utúlie et Yúreallo mir Alilea, lendes senna ar arcane sello i tuluvas undu nestien yondorya, an anes har qualmenna. 48 Mal Yésus quente senna: “Qui ualde cene tanwar ar elmendar, laume savilde.” 49 I arandur quente senna: “Heru, tula undu nó seldonya quale.” 50 Eque senna Yésus: “Mena! Yondolya coirea ná.” I nér sáve i quetta ya Yésus quente senna ar oante. 51 Mal íre enges en i mallesse móliryar se-velder nyarien i yondorya coirea ná. 52 Etta maquentes téna pa i lúme ya olles ambe alwa. Ar quentelte senna: “Noa, i otsea lúmesse, i úre váne sello.” 53 Sie i atar sinte i martanes i imya lúmesse ya Yésus quente senna: “Yondolya coirea ná.” Ar isse ar quanda nosserya sáver. 54 Ta náne i attea tanwa ya Yésus carne, íre túles et Yúreallo mir Alilea.

	39 And in that city many of the Samaritans believe in him by the word of the woman who witnessed: “He told me everything that I did.” 40 Therefore, when the Samaritans came to him, they asked him to remain with them; and he remained there for two days. 41 And numerous ones believed by [that] which he said, 42 and they said to the woman: “We do not believe [any]more because of what you said [quetielyanen, “by your saying”], for we have heard him ourselves, and we know that this man truly is the savior of the world.”
	43 After the two days he went away from there to Galilee. 44 But Jesus himself witnessed that in his own place a prophet does not receive honor [laitie, “praising”]. 45 Thus, when he came to Galilee, the people of Galilee received him, because they had seen the things that he did in Jerusalem at the festival, for they too went to the festival.
	46 Thus he came again to Cana of Galilee, where he changed the water into wine. And [there] was a king’s servant whose son was ill in Capernaum. 47 When this man heard that Jesus had [Q: has] come out of Judea into Galilee, he went to him and asked of him that he was to come down to heal his son, for he was near to death. 48 But Jesus said to him: “If you [pl.] do not see signs and wonders, you do not believe at all.” 49 The king’s servant said to him: “Lord, come down before my boy dies.” 50 Jesus said to him: “Go! Your son is alive.” The man believed the word that Jesus spoke to him and went away. 51 But when he was still on the way his slaves met him to tell him that his son was [Q: is] alive. 52 Therefore he asked them about the hour when he became better [ambe alwa, “more healthy”]. And they said to him: “Yesterday, at the seventh hour, the fever [úre “heat”]  left him.” 53 Thus the father knew that it happened in the same hour that Jesus said to him: “Your son is alive.” And he and his whole family believed. 54 That was the second sign that Jesus did, when he came out of Judea into Galilee. 

RANTA 5
Apa nati sine enge aşar Yúraron, ar Yésus lende amba Yerúsalemenna. 2 Yerúsalemesse ea ailin estaina Heveryasse Vetsáşa, arwa tarmatémar lempe. 3 Mi tai rimbe caine: hlaiwali, lacenítili, *úlévimáli ar hessali, hopila quirie i nenwa. 4 An lúlissen vala i Héruo ununte mir i ailin, tyarila quirie i nenwa, ar aiquen ye lende minya mir i ailin apa i *tarastie i nenwa náne nestana ilya nostaleo hlíveva ya sámes. 5 Mal enge tasse nér sámiéla hlíverya loassen tolto *nelequean. 6 Cenila nér sina caitala tasse, ar istala i *nollo náse hlaiwa anda lúmesse, Yésus quente senna: “Ma meril mále?” 7 I hlaiwa nér hanquente senna: “Heru, uan same nér panien ni i ailinde íre i nén tarcina ná, ar íre inye túla, exe unta nó ni.” 8 Yésus quente senna: “Á orta, á mapa ama caimalya ar á vanta!” 9 Ar mí imya lú i nér camne mále, ar ortanes caimarya ar *yestane vanta.
	Mal sana aure náne *sendare. 10 Etta i Yúrar quenter i nestana nerenna: “Si sendare ná; colie i caima ua lávina lyen.” 11 Mal hanquentes téna: “Ye nin-antane mále, isse quente ninna: Á mapa amba caimalya ar á vanta.” 12 Quentelte senna: “Man ná i nér ye quente lyenna, Ása mapa amba ar á vanta – ?” 13 Mal i nestana nér ua sinte man anes, an Yésus náne ménienwa oa, pan enge şanga i nómesse.

CHAPTER 5
After these things there wsa a festival of [the] Jews, and Jesus went up to Jerusalem. 2 In Jerusalem there is a pool called in Hebrew Bethsatha, having five columnades. 3 In them a multitude was lying: sick ones, blind ones, paralyzed ones and withered ones, waiting for a stirring of the water. 4 For from time to time an angel of the Lord came down into the pool, causing a stirring of the water, and anyone who went first into the pool after the disturbance of the water was healed from every kind of illness that he had. 5 But [there] was  a man there having had his illness for [locative] thirty-eight years. 6 Seeing this man lie there, and knowing that already he was [Q: is ] ill for a long time, Jesus said to him: “Do you want good health?” 7 The sick man answered him: “Lord, I do not have a man to put me in the pool when the water is disturbed, and when I am coming, another goes down before me.” 8 Jesus said to him: “Rise, take up your bed and walk!” 9 And in the same moment the man received good health, and he lifted up his bed and began to walk.
	But that day was a day of rest. 10 Therefore the Jews said to the healed man: “This is a day of rest; carrying the bed is not allowed for you.” 11 But he answered them: “[The one] who gave me good health, he said to me: Take up your bed and walk.” 12 They said to him: “Who is the man who said to you, Take it up and walk – ?” 13 But the healed man did not know who he was, for Jesus had gone away, since [there] was a crowd in the place.

	14 Apa nati sine Yésus se-hirne i cordasse ar quente senna: “Cena, sí samil mále! Áva úcare ambe, i lá martuva lyen ambe urra nat.” 15 I nér oante ar nyarne i Yúrain i náne Yésus ye antane sen mále. 16 Ar tanen i Yúrar roitaner Yésus, pan carnes nati sine i *sendaresse. 17 Mal hanquentes téna: “Atarinya mole tenna sí, ar sie inye móla.” 18 Tanen i Yúrar merner en ambe nahta se, an lá rie rances i *sendare, mal yú estanes Eru véra atarya, carila inse ve Eru.
	19 Etta Yésus hanquente ar eque téna: “Násie, násie quetin lenna, i Yondo ua pole care erya nat insenen, mal rie ya cenis i Atar cára. An *aiqua ya isse care, ta i Yondo yú care mí imya lé. 20 An i Atar mele i Yondo ar tana sen ilqua ya isse care, ar sen-tanuvas cardar túre lá sine, i tatalluvalde. 21 An tambe i Atar orta qualinar ar care te coirie, sie yú i Yondo care i meris coirie. 22 An i Atar ua name aiquen, mal ánies ilya namie i Yondon, 23 in illi laituvar i Yondo ve laitalte i Atar. Ye ua laita i Yondo ua laita i Atar ye mentane se. 24 Násie, násie quetin lenna: Ye hlare quettanya ar save yesse ni-mentane same oira coivie, ar uas tule namienna, mal alahtie ñurullo coivienna.

	14 After these things Jesus found him in the temple and said to him: “See, now you have good health! Do not sin [any]more, [so] that something worse [ambe ulca, “more evil”] will not happen to you.” 15 The man went away and told the Jews that Jesus was [the] one who gave him good health. 16 And therefore the Jews persecuted Jesus, because he did these things in the day of rest. 17 But he answered them: “My father works until now, and so I am working.” 18 For this reason the Jews wanted still more to kill him, for not only did he break the day of rest, but he also called God his own father, making himself like God.
	19 Therefore Jesus answered and said to them: “Truly, truly I say to you, the Son cannot do a single thing by himself, but only [that] which he sees the Father doing. For anything which he does, that the Son also does in the same manner. 20 For the Father loves the Son and shows him everything that he does, and he shall show him deeds greater than these, [so] that you will marvel. 21 For as the Father raises [the] dead and makes them alive, so also the Son makes those he wants alive. 22 For the Father does not judge anyone, but has given all judgement to the Son, 23 that all will praise the Son as they praise the Father. [He] who does not praise the Son does not praise the Father who sent him. 24 Truly, truly I say to you: [He] who hears my word and believes in [the one] who sent me has eternal life, and he does not come to judgement, but has passed from death to life. 

	25 Násie, násie quetin lenna: I lúme túla, ar eas sí, íre qualinar hlaruvar i Eruiono óma, ar i hlarir tuluvar coivienna. 26 An tambe i Atar same coivie insesse, síve ánies i Yondon samie coivie insesse. 27 Ar ánies sen hére namiéva, pan Atanyondo náse. 28 Áva tatalla si, pan i lúme túla yasse illi i ear i noirissen hlaruvar ómarya 29 ar ettuluvar – i carner máre nati enortiesse coivienna, mal i carner şaure nati enortiesse namiéno. 30 Uan pole care erya nat imninen; ve hlarin namin, ar námienya faila ná, an uan cesta véra şelmanya, mal i şelma yeo mentane ni. 
	31 Qui inye *vetta pa inse, *vettienya ua nanwa. 32 Ea exe ye *vetta pa ni, ar istan i *vettierya pa ni nanwa ná. 33 Elde mentaner ennoli Yohánonna, ar isse *evettie pa i nanwie. 34 Inye ua came atano *vettie, mal quetin nati sine i cé nauvalde rehtane. 35 Sana nér náne uryala ar caltala calma, ar ter lúme mernelte same alasse calaryasse. 36 Mal inye same i *vettie ya túra lá ta Yoháno ná, an i cardar yar ánie nin Atarinya telyáven – i cardar yar inye cára – sane cardar *vettar pa ni in Atarinya mentane ni. 37 Ente, i Atar ye ni-mentane, isse *evettie pa ni. Ualde ahlárie ómarya hya ecénie cantarya, 38 ar ualde same quettarya lemyala lesse. An ye mentanes – sesse ualde save.
	39 Ceşilde i tehteler, pan sanalde i tainen samuvalde oira coivie, ar tai nar yar *vettar pa ní. 40 Ananta ualde mere tule ninna, i samuvalde coivie. 41 Uan mere came alcar atanillon, 42 mal istan pa lé in ualde same melme Eruva lesse. 43 Inye utúlie i essenen Atarinyo, mal ualde came ni. Qui exe tule véra esseryanen, camuvalde sé. 44 Manen polilde save, íre camilde alcar quén i exello mal uar cesta i alcar ya tule i erya Ainollo? 45 Áva sana i carpuvan pa ongweldar epe i Atar. Ye carpa pa ongweldar Móses ná, yesse apánielde estelelda. 46 An au sávelde Móseo quetie sávelde ninya, an isse tence pa ni. 47 Mal qui ualde save tecieryar, manen savuvalde ninye quetier?”

	25 Truly, truly I say to you: The hour is coming, and it is now, when [the] dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and [those] who hear shall come to life. 26 For as the Father has life in [him]self, so he has given the Son to have life in [him]self. 27 For he has given him authority of judgement, because he is [the] Son of Man.  28 Do not feel wonder about this, because the hour is coming when all that are in the tombs shall hear his voice 29 and will come out, [those] who did good things in a resurrection [enortie “re-raising”] to life, but [those] who did vile things in a resurrection of judgment. 30 I do not do a single thng by [my]self; as I hear I judge, and my judgment is just, for I do not seek my own will, but the will of [him] who sent me.
	31 If I bear witness about [my]self, my witness is not true. 32 There is another who bears witness about me, and I know that his witness about me is true. 33 You sent some people to John, and he has witnessed about the truth. 34 I do not receive [any] man’s witness, but I say these things that maybe you will be saved. 35 That man was a burning and shining lamp, and for [ter, “through”] an hour you wanted to have joy in his light. 36 But I have the witness that is greater than that of John, for the deeds [or, works] that the Father has given me to complete – the deeds that I am doing – those deeds bear witness about me that my Father sent me. 37 Therefore, the Father who sent me, he has witnessed about me. You have not heard his voice or seen his shape, 38 and you do not have my word remaining in you. For [the one] that he sent – in him you do not believe.
39 You search the scriptures, because you think that by them you will have eternal life, and they are [the ones] that bear witness about me. 40 And yet you do not want to come to me, so that you will have life. 41 I do not want to receive glory from men, 42 but I know about you that you do not have love for God in you. 43 I have come in my Father’s name, but you do not receive me. If another comes in his own name, you will receive him. 44 How can you believe, when you receive glory from one another but do not seek the glory that comes from the only God? 45 Do not think that I will speak about your crimes before the Father. [The one] who speaks about your crimes is Moses, in whom you have put your hope. 46 For if you believed Moses’ saying you believed mine [as well], for he wrote about me. 47 But if you do not believe his writings, how will you believe in my sayings? 

RANTA 6 
Apa nati sine Yésus oante lahtala i Ear Alileo, hya Ear Tiverias. 2 Mal haura şanga se-hilyane, pan cennelte i tanwar yar carnes i hlaiwassen. 3 Tá Yésus lende ama mir oron, ar tasse hamunes as hildoryar. 4 Sí i Lahtie, i aşar Yúraron, hare né. 
	5 Íre Yésus ortane henduryat ar cenne haura şanga túla senna, quentes Filipenna: “Masse mancuvalve ven massar i sine lertuvar mate?” Mal si quentes tyastien he, an isse sinte ya carumnes. 7 Filip hanquente senna: “Lenári tuxa atta uar fárie massain faryala tien, in ilya quén camuva pitya mitta.” 8 Quén i hildoron, Andréas i háno Símon Pétero, quente senna: “Ea sís pitya seldo arwa massaron *findoriva lempe ar hala atto. Mal mana tai ta rimbe quenin?”
	10 Eque Yésus: “Á tyare i atani hamue.” Enge olya salque i nómesse. Etta i atani hamuner, nóte *os húmi lempe. 11 Tá Yésus nampe i massar ar, apa antáve hantale, etsanteset i hamila queninnar, ar sie yú i halar, ilya ya mernelte. 12 Mal apa anelte quátine eques hildoryannar: “Á comya i hehtane mittar, i munta nauva vanwa.” 13 Etta comyaneltet, ar quantelte *vircolcar yunque mittalínen i massaron *findoriva lempe – i lembar hehtane lo i náner mátiéla.
	14 Sie, íre i atani cenner i tanwar yar carnes, quentelte: “Nér sina nanwave ná i Erutercáno ye tulumne mir i mar.” 15 Etta Yésus, istala i sí tulumnelte ar mapumneltes carien se aran, oante mir i oron, isse erinqua.

CHAPTER 6
After these things Jesus went away crossing the Sea of Galilee, or Sea [of] Tiberias. 2 But a huge crowd followed him, because they saw the signs that he did on the sick. 3 Then Jesus went up into a mountain, and there he sat down with his disciples. 4 Now the Passover, the festival of [the] Jews, was near.
	5 When Jesus raised his eyes and saw a great crowd come to him, he said to Philip: “Where will we buy [lit. trade to ourselves] breads so that these may eat?” But this he said to test him, for he knew what he was going to do. 7 Philip answered him: “Two hundred denarii are not enough for breads sufficing for them, [so] that each person will receive a small piece.” 8 One of the dciples, Andrew the brother of Simon Peter, said to him: “[There] is here a small boy having five breads of barley and two fishes. But what are they for so many people?”
	10 Jesus said: “Make the men sit down.” [There] was much grass in the place. Therefore the men sat down, a number [of] around five thousand. 11 Then Jesus took the breads, and after giving thanks, he distributed them to the sitting people, and so also the fishes, all that they wanted. 12 But after they were filled [or, sated] he said to his disciples: “Gather the leftover pieces, that nothing will be lost.” 13 Therefore they gathered them, and they filled twelve baskets with pieces of the five breads of barley – the leftovers left over by [those] that had eaten.
	14 Thus, when the men saw the signs that he did, they said: “This man truly is the prophet who was to come into the world.” 15 Therefore Jesus, knowing that now they were going to come and take him to make him king, went away into the mountain, he alone. 

	16 Íre şinye túle, hildoryar lender undu i earenna, 17 ar mittiéla lunte ménanelte olla i ear Capernaumenna. Mal sí enge mornie, ar Yésus en úne túlienwa téna. 18 Ente, i ear amoronte, pan polda súre surinye. 19 Mal círiéla *os *restandier lempe *yúquean hya *nelequean, cennelte Yésus vantala i earesse ar túla hare i luntenna, ar runcelte. 20 Mal eques téna: “Inye ná; áva ruce!” 21 Etta anelte merila camitas mir i lunte, ar mí imya lú i lunte enge ara i nór yanna névelte lelya. 
	21 I hilyala auresse i şanga ya tarne i hyana fárasse i earo cenner i ua enge tasse lunte. Anelte céniéla i lá ea hyana lunte hequa i er, ar i Yésus ua oante sánen as hildoryar, mal hildoryar erinque oanter. 23 Mal lunteli Tiveriasello túler i nómenna yasse mantelte i massa apa i Heru antane hantale. 24 Etta, íre i şanga cenne in uar ea tasse Yésus hya hildoryar véla, mennelte mir lunteltar ar lender Capernaumenna cestien Yésus.
	25 Íre hirneltes han i ear maquentelte senna: “Ravi, mana i lú yasse túlel sir?” 26 Yésus hanquente téna ar eque: “Násie, násie quetin lenna, cestalden, lá pan cennelde tanwali, mal pan mantelde i massaron ar náner quátine. 27 Mola, lá i mattan ya autuva, mal i mattan ya lemya oira coivien, ya i Atanyondo antauva len; an sesse i Atar, Eru, apánie *lihtarya.”

	When evening came, his disciples went down to the sea, 17 and having entered a boat they were going over the sea to Capernaum. But now it was dark [literally: (there) was darkness], and Jesus still had not come to them. 18 Furthermore, the sea rose up, because a strong wind was blowing. 19 But having sailed around twenty-five or thirty furlongs, they saw Jesus walk on the sea and come near to the boat, and they were afraid. 20 But he said to them: “[It] is I; do not fear!” 21 Therefore they were willing to receive him into the boat, and in the same moment the boat was by the land to which they tried to go. 
	21 On the following day the crowd that stood on the other shore of the sea saw that [there] was not there [any] boat. They had seen that [there] was [Q: is] not another boat except the one, and that Jesus did not go away in [-nen] it with his disciples, but his disciples alone had gone away. 23 But boats from Tiberias came to the place in which they ate the bread after the Lord gave thanks. 24 Therefore, when the crowd saw that Jesus and his disciples alike were [Q: are] not there, they went into their boats and went to Capernaum to seek Jesus.
	25 When they found him on the other side of the sea they asked him: “Rabbi, at what time did you come here? [literally: what (was) the time when you came here?]” 26 Jesus answered them and said: “Truly, truly I say to you, you seek me, not because you saw signs, but because you ate of the breads and were filled [/sated]. 27 Work, not for the food that will pass away, but for the food that remains for eternal life, which the Son of Man will give you; for on him the Father, God, has set his seal.”

	28 Etta quentelte senna: “Mana caruvalme carien i molie Eruo?” 29 Yésus hanquente ar eque téna: “Si Eruo molie ná, i savuvalde yesse sé mentane.” 30 Etta quentelte senna: “Mana, tá, cáral ve tanwa, i cenuvalmes ar savuvalme lyesse? Mana cáral? 31 Atarilmar manter i mán i ravandasse, ve técina ná: Antanes tien massa menello matien.” 32 Etta Yésus quente téna: “Násie, násie quetin lenna: Móses ua antane len i massa menello, mal Atarinya é anta len i nanwa massa menello. 33 An Eruo massa ná ye unta menello ar anta cala i marden.” 34 Etta quentelte senna: “Heru, illume ámen anta massa sina!”
	35 Eque téna Yésus: “Inye ná i massa coiviéva. Ye tule ninna laume oi nauva maita, ar ye save nisse laume oi nauva soica. 36 Mal equétien lenna: ecénielden, ananta ualde save. 37 Ilquen ye i Atar nin-anta tuluva ninna, ar ye tule ninna laume hatuvan ettenna, 38 pan ununtien menello carien, lá ninya indóme, mal i indóme yeo mentane ni. 39 Si ná i indóme yeo mentane ni, i munta nauva nin vanwa ilyo ya ánies nin, mal enortauvanyes i métima auresse. 40 An si Atarinyo indóme ná, in ilquen ye cene i Yondo ar save sesse samuva oira coivie, ar enortauvanyes i métima auresse.”
	41 Tá i Yúrar nurruner senna pan quentes: “Inye ná i massa ya unta menello.” 42 Ar quentelte: “Ma nér sina ua Yésus Yosefion, yeo atar ar amil istalve? Manen lertas quete: Ununtien menello – ?” 43 Yésus hanquente ar eque téna: “Áva na nurrula mici inde. 44 *Úquen pole tule ninna qui i Atar ye ni-mentane ua tuce se, ar inye enortauva se i métima auresse. 45 An técina ná mí Erutercánor: Ar illi mici te nauvar peantane lo i Héru. Ilquen ye ahlárie i Atarello ar apárie tule ninna. 46 Lá i aiquen ecénie i Atar, hequa ye Erullo ná: isse ecénie i Atar. 47 Násie, násie quetin lenna: Ye save same oira coivie.
	48 Inye ná i massa coiviéva. 49 Atarildar manter i mán i ravandasse, ananta quallelte. 50 Si i massa ná ya unta menello, in aiquen pole mate sallo ar ua quale. 51 Inye ná i coirea massa ya unta menello; qui aiquen mate sina masso coituvas tennoio. Ar i massa ya inye antauva hrávenya ná i mardo coivien.” 

	28 Therefore they said to him: “What are we to do in order to do God’s work?” 29 Jesus answered and said to them: “This is God’s work, that you are to believe in [the one] whom he sent.” 30 Therefore they said to him: “What, then, are you doing as a sign, [so] that we will see it and we are going to believe in you? What are you doing? 31 Our fathers ate the manna [Hebrew: mán] in the desert, as is written: He gave them bread from heaven to eat.” 32 Therefore Jesus said to them: “Truly, truly I say to you: Moses did not give you the bread from heaven, but my Father indeed gives you the true bread from heaven. 33 For God’s bread is [he] who comes down from heaven and gives light to the world.” 34 Therefore they said to him: “Lord, always give us this bread!”
	35 Jesus said to them: “I am the bread of life. [He] who comes to me will not ever be hungry, and [he] who believes in me will not ever be thirsty. 36 But I have said to you: you have seen me, and yet you do not believe. 37 Everyone whom the Father gives me will come to me, and [he] who comes to me I will by no means throw out, 38 because I have come down from heaven to do, not my will, but the will of [him] who sent me. 39 This is the will of [him] who sent me, that nothing will be lost to me of all that he has given me, but I will raise it up again at the last day.”
41 Then the Jews murmurmed at him because he said: “I am the bread that came down from heaven.” 42 And they said: “Is this man not Jesus son of Joseph, whose father and mother we know? How may he say: I have come down from heaven – ?” 43 Jesus answered and said to them: “Do not be murmuring among yourselves. 44 Nobody can come to me if the Father who sent me does not draw him, and I shall raise him up again at the last day. 45 For [it] is written in the Prophets: And all among them shall be taught by the Lord. Everybody who has heard from the Father and has learnt comes to me. 46 Not that anyone has seen the Father, except [he] who is from God; he has seen the Father. 47 Truly, truly I say to you: [He] who believes has eternal life.
48 I am the bread of life. 49 Your fathers ate the manna in the desert, and yet they died. 50 This is the bread that comes down from heaven, that anyone can eat of it and not die. 51 I am the living bread that comes down from heaven; if anybody eats of this bread he will live forever. And the bread that I will give is my flesh for the life of the world.” 

	52 Etta i Yúrar cóşer quén as i exe, quétala: “Manen nér sina pole anta ven hráverya matien?” 53 Sie Yésus quente téna: “Násie, násie quetin lenna, qui ualde mate i Atanyondo hráve ar suce sercerya, ualde same coivie indesse. 54 Ye mate hrávenya ar suce sercenya same oira coivie, ar enortauvanyes i métima auresse. 55 An ninya hráve nanwa matta ná, ar ninya serce nanwa yulda ná. 56 Ye mate hrávenya ar suce sercenya lemya nisse, ar ní sesse. 57 Tambe i coirea Atar ni-mentane ar samin coivie i Atarnen, sie yú ye mate ní samuva coivie inyenen. 58 Si ná i massa ya unta menello, lá ve ta ya atarildar manter ananta qualler. Ye mate massa sina coituva tennoio.” 59 Nati sine quentes íre peantanes *yomencoasse Capernaumesse.
	60 Etta rimbali hildoryaron, íre hlasselte si, quenter: “Quetie sina hranga ná; man pole lasta sanna?” 61 Mal Yésus, istala insenen i hildoryar nurruner pa si, quente téna: “Ma si tarca le? 62 Mana, tá, qui cenuvalde i Atanyondo ortala yanna enges yá? 63 I faire ná ya anta coivie; i hráve care munta aşea. I quetier yar inye equétie lenna nar faire ar nar coivie. 64 Mal ear mici le ennoli i uar save.” An i yestallo Yésus sinte i uar sáve ar man náne i quén ye *vartumne se. 65 Ar eques: “Sina castanen equétien lenna: *Úquen pole tule ninna qui ta ua antana sen lo i Atar.”
	66 Epeta rimbali hildoryaron oanter i natinnar cata te ar uar merne vanta óse ambe. 67 Etta Yésus quente i yunquenna: “Ma ualde mere auta, yú lé?” 68 Símon Péter hanquente senna: “Heru, ana man menuvalme? Elye same quetier oira coiviéva, 69 ar asávielme ar istalme in elye Eruo Aire ná.” 70 Yésus hanquente téna: “Ma uan icílie lé yunque? Ar mici lé quén arauco ná!” 71 Carampes pa Yúras, yondorya Símon Iscáriot. An nér sina, quén i yunqueo, *vartumne se. 

	52 Therefore the Jews quarreled one with the other, saying: “How can this man give us his flesh to eat?” 53 Thus Jesus said to them: “Truly, truly I say to you, if you do not eat the flesh of the Son of Man and drink his blood, you do not have life in yourselves. 54 He who eats my flesh and drinks my blood has eternal life, and I will raise him up again at the last day. 55 For my flesh is real food, and my blood is a real drink. 56 [He] who eats my flesh and drinks my blood remains in me, and I in him. 57 As the living Father sent me and I have life by the Father, so also [he] who eats me will have life by me. 58 This is the bread that came down from heaven, not like that which your fathers ate and yet died. [He] who eats this bread will live forever.” 59 These things he said when he was teaching in a synagogue in Capernaum.
	60 Therefore numerous ones of his disciples, when they heard this, said: “This saying is hard; who can listen to it?” 61 But Jesus, knowing by himself that his disiciples murmured about this, said to them: “Does this disturb you? 62 What, then, if you will see the Son of Man ascending to where he was before? 63 The spirit is what gives life; the flesh does nothing beneficial. The sayings that I have spoken to you are spirit and are life. 64 But [there] are among you some people who do not believe.” For from the beginning Jesus knew [those] who did not believe and who was the one who was to betray him. 65 And he said: “For this reason I have said to you: Nobody can come to me if that is not given him by the Father.”
	66 Thereafter numerous ones of his disciples went away to the things behind them and did not want to walk with him [any]more. 67 Therefore Jesus said to the twelve: “Do you not want to go away, you too?” 68 Simon Peter answered him: “Lord, to whom are we to go? You have sayings of eternal life, 69 and we have believed and we know that you are the Holy One of God.” 70 Jesus answered them: “Have I not chosen you twelve? And among you one is a devil!” 71 He talked about Judas, the son of Simon Iscariot. For this man, one of the twelve, was going to betray him.  

RANTA 7
Ar apa nati sine Yésus vantane Alileasse, an uas merne vanta Yúreasse, pan i Yúrar cestaner  nahta se. 2 Mal i aşar Yúraron, i Meren Lassemárion, náne hare. 3 Etta hánoryar quenter senna: “Á auta silo ar mena mir Yúrea, i yú hildotyar cenuvar i cardar yar caritye! 4 An úquen care *aiqua nuldave qui cestas náve sinwa. Qui caritye nati sine, á apanta immo i marden!” 5 An hánoryar uar sáve sesse. 6 Etta Yésus quente téna: “Lúmenya en ua utúlie, mal lén i lúme illume manwa ná. 7 I mar ua pole yelta lé, mal yeltas ní, an *vettan pa sa i cardaryar nar ulce. 8 Alde lelya amba i aşarenna! Inye ua lelya amba aşar sinanna, an lúmenya en ua utúlie.” 9 Apa quetie téna nati sine lemyanes Alileasse. 
	10 Mal apa hánoryar lender i aşarenna, yú sé lende amba, lá pantave, mal nuldave. 11 Etta i Yúrar cestaner se i aşaresse ar quenter: “Masse ná sana nér?” 12 Ar enge olya *nurrule pa sé imíca i şangar. Quelli quenter: “Náse mane nér.” Exeli quenter: “Uas, mal tyaris i şanga ranya!” 13 Ve hanyaina, *úquen carampe pantave pa sé, an runcelte i Yúrallon.

CHAPTER 7 
And after these things Jesus walked in Galilee, for he did not want to walk in Judea, since the Jews sought to kill him. 2 But the festival of [the] Jews, the Feast of Leaf-huts, was near. 3 Therefore his brothers said to him: “Go away from here and go into Judea, that also your disciples will see the deeds that you do! 4 For nobody does anything secretly if he seeks to be known. If you do these things, reveal yourself to the world!”  6 Therefore Jesus said to them: “My hour still has not come, but to you the hour is always ready. 7 The world cannot hate you, but it hates me, for I witnessed about it that its deeds are evil. 8 You go up to the festival! I do not go up to this festival, for my hour still has not come.” 9 After saying these things to them he remained in Galilee.
	10 But after his brothers went to the festival, he too went up, not openly, but secretly. 11 Therefore the Jews sought him at the festival and said: “Where is that man?” 12 And there was much murmuring about him among the crowds. Some people said: “He is a good man.” Others said: “He is not, but he causes the crowd to err!” 13 Of course [lit. “as (is) understood” = self-evident], nobody talked openly about him, for they feared the Jews.

	14 Íre perta i aşaro náne autienwa, Yésus lende amba mir i corda ar peantane. 15 Etta i Yúrar enger elmendasse, quétala: “Manen nér sina ista i Tehteler íre uas apárie ñóle?” 16 Yésus etta hanquente téna ar eque: “Ya peantan ui ninya, mal ná yeva ni-mentane. 17 Qui aiquen mere care indómerya, istuvas pa i peantie qui nas Erullo hya qui quetin et immollo. 18 Ye quete et immollo cestea véra alcarerya; mal ye cesta i alcar i queno ye se-mentane, sé şanda ná, ar lá ea *úfailie sesse. 19 Ma Móses ua antane len i Şanye? Mal *úquen mici le care ve i Şanye quete. Mana i casta yanen cestealde nahta ni?” 20 I şanga hanquente: “Nalye haryaina lo rauco! Man cestea nahta lye?” 21 Yésus hanquente ar eque téna: “Erya carda carnen, ar lé enger illi elmendasse. 22 Sina castanen Móses antane len i *oscirie – lá i nas Mósello, mal i atarillon – ar *oscirilde atan sendaresse. 23 Qui atan came *oscirie i sendaresse, i Móseo şanye lá nauva rácina, ma nalde rúşie nin pan antanen ilvana mále atanen i sendaresse? 24 Áva name ve cenilde, mal nama failie!”
	25 Etta quelli Yerúsalemello quenter: “Ma sé ui i quén ye cestealte nahta? 26 Ar yé! pantave quétas, ar quetilte munta senna. Lau i turcor nanwave ihírier i náse i Hristo? 27 Mal istalve yallo quén sina ná. Íre Messías tuluva, *úquen istuva yallo náse.”
	28 Etta Yésus, íre peantanes i cordasse, etyáme ar quente: “Ní istalde, yú istalde yallo nanye. Lá utúlien imninen, mal ye ni-mentane şanda ná, sé ye elde uar ista. 29 Inye ista se, an sello tulin, ar sé mentane ni.” 30 Tá névelte mapa se, mal *úquen panyane márya sesse, an lúmerya en úme túlienwa. 31 Mal rimbali i şango sáver sesse ar quenter: “Íre i Hristo tuluva, lau caruvas cardar rimbe lá yar acárie nér sina?”

	14 When half of the festival had passed, Jesus went up into the temple and taught. 15 Therefore the Jews were in wonder, saying: “How does this man know the Scriptures when he has not learnt lore?” 16 Jesus therefore answered them and said: “What I teach is not mine, but is of [him] who sent me. 17 If anybody wants to do his will, he shall know concerning the teaching if it is from God or if I speak out of myself. 18  [He] who speaks out of himself is seeking his own glory; but [he] who seeks the glory of the person who sent him, he is true, and there is no unrighteousness in him. 19 Did not Moses give you the Law? But nobody among you does as the Law says. For what reason are you seeking to kill me?” 20 The crowd answered: “You are possessed by a demon! Who is seeking to kill you?” 21 Jesus answered and said to them: “One deed I did, and you were all in wonder. 22 For this reason Moses gave you the circumcision – not that it is from Moses, but from the fathers – and  you circumcise a man at a day of rest. 23 If a man receives circumcision on the day of rest, that the law of Moses is not to be broken, are you angry at me because I gave perfect health to a man on the day of rest? 24 Do not judge as you see, but judge justly!”
	25 Therefore some people from Jerusalem said: “Is not he the one that they are seeking to kill? 26 And look! he is speaking openly, and they say nothing to him. Surely the rulers have not really found that he is the Christ? 27 But we know from where this man is. When [the] Messiah shall come, nobody will know from where he is.”
	28 Therefore Jesus, when he taught in the temple, cried out and said: “Me you know, you know also from where I am. I have not come by myself, but [he] who sent me is true, he whom you do not know. 29 I know him, for from him I come, and he sent me.” 30 Then they tried to seize him, but nobody laid his hand on him, for his time still had not come. 31 But numerous ones of the crowd believed in him and said: “When the Christ shall come, surely he will not do deeds more numerous than [the ones] that this man has done?”

	32 I Farisar hlasser i şanga nurrua nati sine pa se, ar i hére *airimor ar i Farisar mentaner cánoli se-mapien. 33 Etta eque Yésus: “En euvan aselde şinta lúme, nó autuvan yenna ni-mentane. 34 Cestuvalden, mal ualde hiruva ni, ar yanna ean lé uar poluva tule.” 35 Etta i Yúrar quenter mici inte: “Manna nér sina autuva, i elve uar hiruva se? Lau autuvas innar nar vintaine mici Hellenyar, peantien Hellenyar? 36 Mana tea quetie sina ya quentes: Cestuvalden, mal ualde hiruva ni, ar yanna ean lé uar poluva tule – ?” 
37 Mal i métima auresse, i túra aure i aşaro, Yésus oronte ar etyáme, quétala: “Qui aiquen soica ná, lava sen tule ninna sucien! 38 Ye save nisse, et ammitya rantaryallo ulyuvar celuméli coirea nenwa, ve i Tehtele equétie.” 39 Mal si quentes pa i faire ya camumner i sáver sesse. An ena lá enge faire, an Yésus en úme *alcaryaina. 40 Etta quelli i şango i hlasser quettar sine quenter: “Quén sina é ná i Erutercáno.”41 Exeli quenter: “Si ná i Hristo.” Mal enger i quenter: “Lau i Hristo tule Alileallo? 42 Ma i Tehtele ua quete i tule i Hristo i erdo Laviro, ar Vet-Lehemello, i masto yasse enge Lavir?” 43 Etta enge şanca pa se i şangasse. 44 Mal ennoli mici te merner mapatas, mal *úquen panyane mát sesse.
45 Etta i cánor nanwenner i hére *airimonnar ar Farisannar, ar té quenter téna: “Manen ualde túlua se aselde?” 46 I cánor hanquenter: “Atan ua oi acarpie sie.” 47 I Farisar etta hanquenter: “Lau yú lé nar *útulyaine? 48 Ma aiquen imíca i turcor hya Farisar asávie sesse? 49 Mal şanga sina ya ua ista i Şanye, té nar húne!”
50 Nicorémus, quén imíca te ye náne túlienwa senna yá, quente téna: 51 “Lau Şanyelva name nér qui mo ua minyave ánie sen hlarie ar ista ya acáries?” 52 Hanquentelte senna: “Ma yú elye Alileallo ná? Ceşa ar cena i lá nauva Erutercáno ortaina et Alileallo.” 53 Tá oantelte, ilquen maryanna.

32 The Pharisees heard the crowd murmuring these things about him, and the chief priests and the Pharisees sent some officers to seize him. 33 Therefore Jesus said: “I will still be with you a short time, before I shall go away to [the one] who sent me. 34 You will seek me, but you will not find me, for where I am you cannot come.” 35 Therefore the Jews said among themselves: “Where will this man go away to, that we will not find him? Surely he will not go away to [those] who are scattered among the Greek, in order to teach the Greek? 36 What does this saying mean that he said: You will seek me, but you will not find me, and where I am you cannot come – ?”
	37 But on the last day, the great day of the festival, Jesus stood up and cried out, saying: “If anyone is thirsty, let him come to me to drink! 38 [He] who believes in me, from his innermost part [there] will flow streams of living water, as the Scripture has said.” 39 But this he said about the spirit that [those] were to receive who believed in him. For still there was no spirit, for Jesus still was not glorified. 40 Therefore some of the crowd that heard these words said: “This person is indeed the Prophet.” 41 Others said: “This is the Christ.” But [there] were [those] who said: “Surely the Christ does not come from Galilee? 42 Does not the Scripture say that the Christ comes of the seed of David, and from Bethlehem, the village where David was?” 43 Therefore [there] was a split concerning him in the crowd. 44 But some people among them wanted to seize him, but no one laid hands on him. 
	45 Therefore the officers returned to the chief priests and to the Pharisees, and they said to them:  “How [is it that] you are not bringing him with you?” 46 The officers said: “No man has ever spoken like this.” 47 The Pharisees therefore answered: “Sure you are not misled as well? 48 Has anyone among the rulers or Pharisees believed in him? 49 But this crowd that does not know the Law, they are accursed!”
	50 Nicodemus, one among them who had come to him formerly, said to them: 51 “Surely our Law does not judge a man unless one has first given him a hearing and knows what he has done?” 52 They answered him: “Are you too from Galilee? Search and see that a prophet will not be raised up out of Galiliee.” 53 Then they went away, everyone to his house.

RANTA 8
Mal Yésus lende Orontenna *Milpieron. 2 Árasse nanwennes i cordanna, ar i quanda lie túle senna, ar hamunes ar peantane tien. 3 Mal i ingolmor ar i Farisar taller senna nís mapana *hrupuhtiesse. Panyala se endeltasse 4 quentelte Yésunna: “*Peantar, nís sina anaie mapana i cardasse *hrupuhtiéva. 5 I Şanyesse Móses canne i nahtuvalme taiti nissi hatiénen sarni téna. Mana, tá, elye quete?” 6 Quentelte si tyastien se, i samuvalte nat yanen ence tien *ulquete se. Mal cumbes undu ar tence i talamesse leperyanen. 7 Íre maquentelte senna himítive, orontes ar quente tien: “Lava yen pen úcare ná hate senna i minya sar!” 8 Ar ata cuvila undu tences i talamesse. 9 Mal i hlasser si lender oa, quén apa quén, i amyárar minye, tenna lemnes erinqua as i nís ye tarne endeltasse. 10 Yésus oronte ar quente senna: “Nís, masse nalte? Ma *úquen namne lye?” 11 Eques: “*Úquen, heru.” Yésus quente: “Yú inye ua name lye. Mena; ho sí áva úcare ambe.” 
12 Tá Yésus carampe téna ata, quétala: “Inye i mardo cala ná. Ye hilya ní ua vantuva morniesse, mal samuva i cala coiviéva.” 13 Sie i Farisar quenter senna: “*Vettal pa imle; *vettielya ua nanwa.” 14 Yésus hanquente ar eque: “Yando qui *vettan pa imne, *vettienya nanwa ná, pan istan yallo tulin ar yanna autan. 15 Elde namir i hrávenen; inye laume name aiquen. 16 Ananta, qui é namin, námienya nanwa ná, pan uan erinqua, mal i Atar ye ni-mentane ea óni. 17 Ente, véra Şanyeldasse ná técina: Atan atto *vettie nanwa ná. 18 Inye quén ná ye *vetta pa imne, ar i Atar ye ni-mentane *vetta pa ni.” 19 Etta quentelte senna: “Masse ea Atarelya?” Yésus hanquente: “Loitalde ista ni ar Atarinya véla. Au sintelde ní, sintelde yú Atarinya.” 20 Quetier sine quentes i harwesse íre peantanes i cordasse. Mal *úquen nampe se, pan lúmerya en úne túlienwa.

CHAPTER 8
But Jesus went to the Mount of Olives. 2 At dawn he returned to the temple, and the whole people came to him, and he sat down and taught them. 3 But the scribes [ingolmor “loremasters”] and the Pharisees brought to him a woman [who had been] seized in adultery. Placing her in their midst 4 they said to Jesus: “Teacher, this woman has been seized in the act of adultery. 5 In the Law Moses commanded that we are to kill such women by throwing stones at them. What, then, do you say?” 6 They said this to test him, that they were to have a thing by which they could accuse him. But he bent down and wrote on the ground with his finger. 7 When they asked him persistently, he arose and said to them: “Let [him] who is without sin throw at her the first stone!” 8 And again bending down be wrote on the ground. 9 But [those] who heard this went away, one ofter one, the elders first, until he remained alone with the woman who stood in their midst. 10 Jesus arose and said to her: “Woman, where are they? Did nobody judge you?” 11 She said: “Nobody, lord.” Jesus said: “Also I do not [= Neither do I…] judge you. Go; from now [on] do not sin [any]more.”
	12 Then Jesus talked to them again, saying: “I am the light of the world. [He] who follows me will not walk in darkness, but will have the light of life.” 13 Thus the Pharisees said to him: “You witness about [your]self; your witness is not true.” 14 Jesus answered and said: “Even if I witness about [my]self, my witness is true, since I know from whom I come and where I go away. 15 You judge by the flesh; I do not judge anyboy at all.  16 And yet, if I do judge, my judgement is true, since I am not alone, but the Father who sent me is with me. 17 Furthermore, in your own Law [it] is written: The witness of two men is true. 18 I am one who witnesses about [my]self, and the Father who sent me witnesses about me.” 19 Therefore they said to him: “Where is your Father?” Jesus answered: “You fail to know me and my father alike. If you knew me, you knew also my Father.” 20 These sayings he spoke in the treasury when he taught in the temple. But nobody seized him, since his time still had not come. 

21 Sie quentes téna ata: “Autan, ar cestuvalden, ananta qualuvalde úcareldasse. Yanna inye auta elde uar pole tule.” 22 Etta i Yúrar quenter: “Lau nahtuvasexe? Pan quetis: Yanna inye auta elde uar pole tule.” 23 Mal quentes téna: “Elde nar i tumnallon; inye i tarmenillon ná. Elde nar mar sinallo; inye ua mar sinallo. 24 Etta quenten lenna i qualuvalde úcareldassen. An qui ualde save in inye sé ná, qualuvalde úcareldassen.”
25 Etta quentelte senna: “Man nálye?” Eque téna Yésus: “Ye nyarnen len i yestallo. 26 Samin rimbe natali quetien ar namien pa lé. Mal ye ni-mentane şanda ná, ar i nati yar hlassen sello quetin i mardesse.” 27 Ualte hanyane i carampes téna pa i Atar. 28 Etta Yésus quente: “Íre orortayelde i Atanyondo, tá istuvalde in inye sé ná, ar i carin munta imninen, mal tambe i Atar ni-peantane quetin nati sine. 29 Ar ye ni-mentane ea asinye; uas ehehtie ni erinqua, pan inye illume care ya fasta se.” 30 Íre quentes nati sine, rimbali sáver sesse.

21 Thus he said to them again: “I go away, and you will seek me, and yet you will die in your sin. To where I go away you cannot come. 22 Therefore the Jews said: “Surely he will not kill himself? Since he says: To where I go you cannot come.” 23 But he said to them: “You are from the low [places]; I am from the high places. You are from this world; I am not from this world. 24 Therefore I said to you that you will die in your sins. For if you do not believe that I am he, you will die in your sins.”
25 Therefore they said to him: “Who are you?” Jesus said to them: “[I am] who I told you from the beginning. 26 I have many things to say and to judge concerning you. But [he] who sent me is true, and the things that I heard from him I speak in the world.” 27 They did not understand that he spoke to them about the Father. 28 Therefore Jesus said: “When you have lifted up the Son of Man, then you will know that I am he, and that I do nothing by myself [or, on my own initiative], but as the Father taught me I speak these things. 29 And [he] who sent me is with me; he has not left me alone, because I always do [that] which is pleases him.” 30 When he said these things, many believed in him.

31 Etta Yésus quente i Yúrannar i sáver sesse: “Qui lemyalde quettanyasse, nalde nanwave hildonyar, 32 ar istuvalde i nanwie, ar i nanwie leryauva le.” 33 Hanquentelte senna: “Nalme Avrahámo erde, ar ualme oi anaie aiqueno móli. Manen lertal quete: Nauvalde lére –?” 34 Yésus hanquente téna: “Násie, násie quetin lenna: Ilquen ye care úcare, mól ná i úcareo. 35 Ente, i mól ua lemya i coasse tennoio; i yondo lemya tennoio. 36 Etta, qui i Yondo le-lerya, é nauvalde lére. 37 Istan in elde nar Avrahámo erde; mal cestalde nahta ní, an quettanya ua hire nóme imíca le. 38 Yar ecénien ara Atarinya quetin; ar mí imya lé elde carir yar ahlárielde atareldallo.” 39 Hanquentes senna: “Atarelma Avraham ná!” Eque téna Yésus: “Qui nalde Avrahámo híni, cara Avrahámo cardar! 40 Mal sí cestalde nahta ní, atan ye anyárie len i nanwie ya hlassen Erullo. Avraham ua carne sie. 41 Carilde i cardar atareldo.” Quentelte senna: “Umilme nóne *hrupuhtiénen; samilme erya Atar, Eru.”
	42 Yésus hanquente téna: “Au Eru Atarelda né, mélelde ní, an Erullo etutúlien ar nanye sís. Ente, uan túle imninen, mal isse ni-mentane. 43 Manen ualde hanya ya quétan? Pan ua ece len lasta quettanya. 44 Nalde atareldo, i Arauco, ar merilde care atareldo íri. Isse náne *atannahtar i yestallo, ar uas tarne tulca i nanwiesse, pan nanwie lá ea sesse. Íre quetis i furu quetis et véraryallon, pan náse *furindo ar i furuo atar. 45 Mal pan inye quete lenna i nanwie, ualde save quetienya. 46 Man mici lé naitya ní pa úcare? Qui quetin nanwie, manen ualde save ya quetin? 47 Ye Erullo ná lasta Eruo quetier. Sinen elde uar lasta, an ualde Erullo.”

	31 Therefore Jesus said to the Jews that believed in him: “If you remain in my word, you are truly my disciples, 32 and you shall know the truth, and the truth will free you.” 33 They answered him: “We are Abraham’s seed, and we have not ever been anybody’s slaves. How can you say: You shall be free – ? 34 Jesus answered them: “Truly, truly I say to you: Everyone who does [or, commits] sin is a slave of the sin. 35 Furthermore, the slave does not remain in the house forever; the son remains forever. 36 Therefore, if the Son frees you, you will indeed be free. 37 I know that you are Abraham’s seed; but you are seeking to kill me, for my word does not find [any] place among you. 38 [The things] that I have seen beside my Father I speak; and in the same manner you do [the things] that you have heard from your father.” 39 They answered him: “Our father is Abraham!” Jesus said to them: “If you are Abraham’s children, do Abraham’s deeds! 40 But now you seek to kill me, a man who has told you the truth that I heard from God. Abraham did not do so. 41 You do the deeds of your father.” They said to him: “We are not born by fornication; we have a single Father, God.”
	42 Jesus answered them: “If God was your Father, you loved me, for from God I have come forth and I am here. Furthermore, I did not come by [my]self, but he sent me. 43 How [is it that] do you not understand what I am saying? Because you cannot listen to my word. 44 You are of your father, the Devil, and you want to do your father’s desires. He was a manslayer from the beginning, and he did not stand firm in the truth, because truth is not in him. When he speaks the lie he speaks out of his own [things], because he is a liar and the father of the lie. 45 But because I say to you the truth, you do not believe my word. 46 Who among you rebukes me about sin? If I speak truth, how [is it that] you do not believe what I say? 47 [He] who is from God listens to the sayings of God. Because of [-nen] this you do not listen, for you are not from God.” 

48 I Yúrar hanquenter senna: “Ma ualme quete mai i nalye Samárea ar haryaina lo rauco?” 49 Yésus hanquente: “Uan haryaina lo rauco, mal laitan Atarinya, ar lé *úlaitar ní. 50 Mal uan cesta alcar imnin; ea Quén ye cesta sa, ar isse i námo ná. 51 Násie, násie quetin lenna: Qui aiquen himya quettanya, laume oi cenuvas qualme.” 52 I Yúrar quenter senna: “Sí é istalme i nalye haryaina lo rauco. Avraham qualle, yú i Erutercánor, mal elye quete: Qui aiquen himya quettanya, laume oi cenuvas qualme. 53 Lau elye ná túra lá Avraham atarelma, ye qualle? Yú i Erutercánor qualler. Man carilyexe?” 54 Yésus hanquente: “Qui antan alcar imnin, alcarinya munta ná. Ye inyen anta alcar Atarinya ná, ye elde quetir Ainolda ná, 55 ananta ualde ista se. Mal inye ista se. Ar au quenten in uan ista se, anen ve lé – hurila. Mal istanyes, ar quettarya himyan. 56 Avraham atarelda sáme túra alasse i sanwenen i cenumnes ninya aure, ar cenneses ar náne valima.” 57 Etta i Yúrar quenter senna: “Elye en ua same loar *lepenquean, ananta ecéniel Avraham?” 58 Yésus quente téna: “Násie, násie quetin lenna, nó Avraham enge, inye ea.” 59 Etta leptanelte sarni hatien tai senna, mal Yésus nurtanexe ar oante i cordallo.

48 The Jews said to him: “Do we not say well [= rightly] that you are a Samaritan and possessed by a demon?” 49 Jesus answered: “I am not possessed by a demon, but I honor [or “praise”] my Father, and you dishonor me. 50 But I am not seeking glory for myself; there is One who seeks it, and he is the judge. 51 Truly, truly I say to you: If anyone keeps my word, he shall by no means ever see death. 52 The Jews said to him: “Now we know indeed that you are possessed by a demon. Abraham died, also the prophets, but you say: If anyone abides by my word, he shall by no means ever see death. 53 Surely you are not greater than Abraham our father, who died? Also the prophets died. What do you make [of] [your]self? 54 Jesus answered: “If I will give glory to myself, my glory is nothing. [He] who gives me glory is my Father, who you say is your God, 55 and yet you do not know him. But I know him. And if I said that I do not know him, I were like you – lying. But I know him, and his word I keep. 56 Abraham your father had great joy at the thought that he was to see my day, and he saw it and was glad.” 57 Therefore the Jews said to him: “You still do not have [an age of] fifty years, and yet you have seen Abraham?” 58 Jesus said to them: “Truly, truly I say to you, before Abraham was, I am.” 59 Therefore they picked up stones to throw them at him, but Jesus hid himself and went away from the temple.

RANTA 9
Íre lahtanes, cennes nér laceníte i mónallo. 2 Ar hildoryar maquenter senna: “Ravi, man úacárie, nér sina hya nostaruryat, pan anes nóna laceníte?” 3 Yésus hanquente: “Nér sina ua úcarne, hya nostaruryat, mal si martane in Eruo cardar nauvaner apantane issenen. 4 Mauya ven care i molie yeo ni-mentane íre ea aure; i lóme túla yasse *úquen pole mole. 5 Íre ean i mardesse, nanye i mardo cala.” 6 Quétéla nati sine, piutanes i talamenna ar carne luxo i piutanen, ar panyanes i luxo to i nero hendu 7 ar eque senna: “Mena, sova imle i ailinde estaina Siloam” – ya tea Mentana. Ar sie oantes ar sóve inse, ar nanwennes cenila.
	8 Etta i armaror ar i yá cenner i náse *iquindo quenter: “Nér sina ná ye hamme iquila, ma naite?” 9 Ennoli quenter: “Náse sé.” Exeli quenter: “Lá, mal náse ve sé mi nemesta.” I nér quente: “Inye ná sé!”
	10 Etta quentelte senna: “Manen, tá, hendulyat nánet latyane?” 11 Hanquentes: “I nér estaina Yésus carne luxo ar sa-panyane hendunyatse ar quente ninna: Mena Siloamenna ar sova imle. Etta lenden ar sóve imne, ar tá polden cene.” 12 Ar quentelte senna: “Masse ná sana nér?” Eques: “Uan ista.”

CHAPTER 9
When he passed by, he saw a man blind from the womb. 2 And his disciples inquired of him: “Rabbi, who has sinned, this man or his parents, since he was born blind?” 3 Jesus answered: “This man did not sin,  or his parents, but this happened [so] that God’s deeds were to be revealed by means of him. 4 [It] is necessary for us to do the work of [him] who sent me while [it] is day; the night is coming when nobody can work. 5 While I am in the world, I am the world’s light.” 6 After he said these things, he spat on the ground and made a mud with the spit, and he put the mud upon the man’s eyes 7 and said to him: “Go, wash [your]self in the pool called Siloam” – which means Sent. And so he went away and washed himself, and he returned seeing. 
	8 Therefore the neighbors and [those] who formerly saw that he was [Q: is] a beggar said: “This man is [he] who sat begging, no?” 9 Some people said: “It is he.” Others said: “No, but he is like him in appearance.” The man said: “I am he!”
	10 Therefore they said to him: “How, then, were your eyes opened?” 11 He answered: “The man called Jesus made a mud and put it on my eyes and said to me: Go to Siloam and wash yourself. Therefore I went and washed [my]self, and then I could see.” 12 And they said to him: “Where is that man?” He said: “I do not know.”
	
	13 Tallelte i nér ye yá náne laceníte i Farisannar. 14 Mal enge sendare i auresse ya Yésus carne i luxo ar latyane henyat. 15 Sie yú i Farisar maquenter senna pa manen camnes *céne. Eques téna: “Panyanes luxo hendunyatse ar sóven imne, ar polin cene.” 16 Etta ennoli i Farisaron quenter: “Nér sina ua Erullo, pan uas hepe i sendare.” Exeli quenter: “Manen pole nér ye úcarindo ná care taiti tanwar?” Ar enge şanca mici te. 17 Etta quentelte i laceníte nerenna ata: “Mana elye quete pa se, pan latyanes hendulyat?” I nér quente: “Náse Erutercáno.”
	18 Mal i Yúrar uar sáve pa se i yá anes laceníte ar camne *céne, tenna yaldelte i nostaru i nero ye camne *céne. 19 Ar maquentelte túna: “Ma quén sina ná yondosta, ye quetiste náne nóna laceníte? Manen, tá, polis cene sí?” 20 Sie nostaruryat hanquentet: “Istamme i si yondomma ná ar in anes nóna laceníte. 21 Mal manen sí polis cene uamme ista, hya man latyane henduryat uamme ista. Maqueta senna! Náse veaner. Polis quete insen.” 22 Nostaruryat quentet nati sine pan runcette i Yúrallon, an nóvo i Yúrar náner o¨liéla er sámo i qui aiquen *etequentane Yésus ve Hristo, nauvanes hehtana i *yomencoallo. 23 Sinen nostaruryat quentet: “Náse veaner; maqueta senna.”

	13 They brought the man who formerly was blind to the Pharisees. 14 But [it] was a day of rest on the day that Jesus made the mud and opened his eyes. 15 So also the Pharisees asked him about how he received sight. He said to them: “He put a mud on my eyes and I washed [my]self, and I can see.” 16 Therefore some of the Pharisees said: “This man is not from God, since he does not keep the day of rest.” Others said: “How can a man who is a sinner do such signs?” And [there] was a split among them. 17 Therefore they said to the blind man again: “What do you say about him, since he opened your eyes?” The man said: “He is a prophet.”
	18 But the Jews did not believe concerning him that formerly he was blind and had received sight, until they called his parents of the man who received sight. 19 And they asked them: “Is this person your son, who you say was born blind? How, then, [is it that] he can see now?” 20 Thus his parents answered: “We know that this is our son and that he was born blind. 21 But how he can see now we do not know, or who opened his eyes we do not know.  Ask him! He is an adult man. He can speak for [him]self.” 22 His parents said these things because they feared the Jews, for beforehand the Jews had come to an agreement [lit. had become of one mind] that if anyone confessed Jesus as Christ, he was to be excluded from the synagogue.  23 Because of this his parents said: “He is an adult man; ask him.”

	24 Etta yaldelte mi attea lú i nér ye yá náne laceníte ar quenter senna: “Á anta Erun alcar; istalme i nér sina úcarindo ná.” 25 Mal isse hanquente: “Qui náse úcarindo uan ista. Er nat istan, i apa náve laceníte sí cenin.” 26 Etta quentelte senna: “Mana carnes lyen? Manen latyanes hendulyat?” 27 Hanquentes téna: “Nyarnen len nóvo, ar ualde lastane. Mana i casta yanen merilde hlaritas ata? Ma yú lé merir ole hildoryar?” 28 Ar naicineltes ar quenter: “Elye hildo ná sana nero, mal elme nar hildor Móseo. 29 Istalme in Eru acarpie Mósenna, mal pa nér sina ualme ista mallo náse.” 30 I nér hanquente ar eque téna: “Si é ná elmenda, in ualde ista mallo náse, ananta latyanes hendunyat! 31 Istalve in Eru ua lasta úcarindonnar, mal qui aiquen ruce Erullo ar care indómerya, he lasta senna. 32 Yalúmello *úquen oi ahlárie in aiquen latyane hendu queno ye náne nóna laceníte. 33 Au nér sina úne Erullo, poldes care munta.” 34 Hanquentelte senna: “Elye náne nóna aqua mi úcari, ananta peantal me?” Ar hanteltes ettenna.
	35 Yésus hlasse i hanteltes ettenna, ar híriéla se quentes: “Ma elye save i Atanyondosse?” 36 I nér hanquente: “Ar man náse, heru, i polin save sesse?” 37 Eque senna Yésus: “Ecénielyes; é náse ye quéta aselye.” 38 Tá eques: “Savin, Heru!” Ar hantesexe undu epe se. 39 Ar eque Yésus: “Namien túlen mir mar sina, in i laceníti poluvar cene, ar in i cenilar oluvar laceníti.” 40 Ennoli i Farisaron i enger óse hlasser nati sine, ar quentelte senna: “Lau yú elme nar laceníti?” 41 Eque téna Yésus: “Au anelde laceníti, pennelde úcare. Mal sí quetilde: Cenilme. Úcarelda lemya.”

	24 Therefore they called for a second time the man who formerly was blind and said to him: “Give glory to God; we know that this man is a sinner.” 25 But he answered: “If [/whether] he is a sinner I do not know. One thing I know, that after being blind I now see.” 26 Therefore they said to him: “What did he do to you? How did he open your eyes?” 27 He said to them: “I told you before, and you did not listen. What is the reason that you want to hear it again? Do you too want to become his disciples?” 28 And they abused him and said: “You are a disciple of that man, but we are disciples of Moses. 29 We know that God has spoken to Moses, but of this man we do not know where he is from.” 30 The man answered and said to them: “This is indeed a wonder, that you do not know where he is from, and yet he opened my eyes! 31 We know that God does not listen to sinners, but if anybody fears God and does his will, he listens to him. 32 From of old nobody has ever heard that anybody opened the eyes of one who was born blind. 33 If this man was not from God, he could do nothing.” 34 They answered him: “You were born wholly in sins, and yet you teach us?” And they threw him out.
	35 Jesus heard that they had thrown him out, and having found him he said: “Do you believe in the Son of Man?” 36 The man answered: “And who is he, lord, that I can believe in him?” 37 Jesus said to him: “You have seen him; indeed he is [the one] who is speaking with you.” 38 Then he said: “I believe, Lord!” And he threw himself down before him. 39 And Jesus said: “For judgment I came into this world, that the blind will be able to see, and that the seeing will become blind.” 40 Some of the Pharisees that were with him heard these things, and they said to him: “Surely we are not blind as well?” 41 Jesus said to them: “If you were blind, you had no sin. But now you say: We see. Your sin remains.” 

RANTA 10
”Násie, násie quetin lenna: Ye ua tule minna i mámannar ter i fenna, mal *rete ama hyana nómesse, sana quén arpo ar pilu ná. 2 Mal ye tule minna ter i fenna mavar  ná i mámaron. 3 Issen i *fennatir latya, ar i mámar lastar ómaryanna, ar yalis vére mámaryar essenen ar te-tulya etsenna. 4 Íre utúlies véraryar etsenna, vantas epe te, ar i mámar hilyar se, pan istalte ómarya. 5 Ettelea quén laume hilyalte, mal uşuvalte sello, pan ualte ista i óma ettelearon.” 6 Yésus quente sestie sina téna, mal ualte hanyane yar quentes téna.
	7 Etta Yésus quente ata: “Násie, násie quetin lenna: Inye ná i fenna i mámaron. 8 Illi i túler nó ni nar arpor ar pilur, mal i mámar uar lastane téna. 9 Inye i fenna ná; aiquen ye tule minna ter ní nauva rehtana, ar menuvas minna ar ettenna ar hiruva nessele. 10 I arpo ua tule hequa pilien ar nahtien ar nancarien. Inye utúlie i samuvalte coivie ar samuvalte úve. 11 Inye i mane mavar ná; i mane mavar anta coivierya rá i mámain. 12 I paityaina nér, ye ua mavar ar yeva i mámar uar véraryar, cene i ñarmo túla ar uşe – ar i ñarmo mapa te ar vinta te – 13 pan náse paityaina nér ar i mámar uar valdie sen. 14 Inye i mane mavar ná, ar istan mámanyar ar mámanyar istar ní, 15 síve i Atar ista ni ar inye ista i Atar, ar antan coivienya rá i mámain.
	16 Samin yú hyane mámali, i uar mici mámar sine; yú té mauya nin tulya, ar lastuvalte ómanyanna, ar nauvalte erya lámáre, erya mavar. 17 Sina castanen i Atar mele ni, pan antan coivienya, i camuvanyes nan. 18 *Úquen amápie sa nillo, mal antanyes véra nirmenen. Samin hére antáven sa, ar samin hére camien sa nan. I canwa pa si camnen Atarinyallo.”
	19 Sine quettainen enge hyana şanca imíca i Yúrar. 20 Rimbali mici te quenter: “Náse haryaina lo rauco ar ea sámaryo ettesse! Manen ná i  lastalde senna?” 21 Exeli quenter: “Sine uar i quetier raucoharyaina nero. Rauco lau pole latya i hendu lacenítion?”

CHAPTER 10
“Truly, truly I say to you: [He] who does not come in to the sheep through the door, but climbs up in another place, that person is a thief and a robber. 2 But [he] who comes in through the door is [the] shepherd of the sheep. 3 To him the door-watcher opens, and the sheep listen to his voice, and he calls his own sheep by name and leads them outside. 4 When he has led his own outside, he walks before them, and the sheep follow him, since they know his voice. 5 A strange person they do not follow, but they flee from him, since they do not know the voice of strangers.” 6 Jesus spoke this comparison to them, but they did not understand [the things] that he said to them.
	7 Therefore Jesus said to them again: “Truly, truly I say to you: I am the door of the sheep. 8 All who came before me are thieves and robbers, but the sheep did not listen to them. 9 I am the door; anyone who comes in through me will be saved, and he will go in and out and will find pasturage. 10 The thief does not come except to steal and to kill and to destroy. I have come that they will have life and they will have abundance. 11 I am the good shepherd; the good shepherd gives his life on behalf of the sheep. 12 The paid man, who is not a shepherd and [yeva =] of whom the sheep are not his own, sees the wolf come and flees – and the wolf seizes them and scatters them – 13 since he is a paid man and the sheep are not important to him. 14 I am the good shepherd, and I know my sheep and my sheep know me, 15 as the Father knows me and I know the Father, and I give my life on behalf of the sheep.
	16 I have also some other sheep, that are not among these sheep; them as well [it] is necessary for me to lead, and they will listen to my voice, and they will be a single flock, a single shepherd. 17 By this reason the Father loves me, since I give my life, that I can receive it back. 18 Nobody has taken it from me, but I give it by my own will. I have authority to give it, and I have authority to receive it again. The command about this I received from my Father.”
	19 Because of these words there was another split among the Jews. 20 Numerous ones among them said: “He is possessed by a demon and is out of his mind! How is [it] that you listen to him?” 21 Others said: “These are not the sayings of a demon-possessed man. Surely a demon cannot open the eyes of blind [people]?” 

22 Lúme yanasse enge i aşar ceutáveva Yérusalemesse. Enge hríve, 23 ar Yésus vantane i cordasse, Solomondo tarmatémasse. 24 Etta i Yúrar pelder se ar quenter senna: “Manen andave me-hepuval útanciesse? Qui elye i Hristo ná, ámen nyare pantave!” 25 Yésus hanquente téna: “Nyarnen len, ananta ualde save. I cardar yar inye cára Atarinyo essenen, tai *vettar pa ni. 26 Mal elde uar save, pan ualde ninye mámaron. 27 Ninye mámar lastar ómanyanna, ar istanyet, ar hilyalten. 28 Ar antan tien oira coivie, ar laume nauvalte oi nancarne, ar *úquen te-rafuva et mányallo. 29 Atarinya, ye ánie te nin, ná túra lá ilye exi, ar *úquen pole te-rafe et máryallo i Atar. 30 Inye yo i Atar er nát.”
31 Ata i Yúrar leptaner sarni hatien tai senna. 32 Yésus hanquente téna: “Tannen len rimbe máre cardali i Atarello. Pa mana sane cardaron merilde hate sarni ninna?” 33 I Yúrar hanquenter senna: “Hátalme sarni lyenna, lá pa mára carda, mal pa naiquetie, ar pan elye ye atan ná care imle aino!” 34 Yésus hanquente téna: “Ma ua técina Şanyeldasse: Quenten: Nalde ainor – ? 35 Qui estanes ainor i queni innar Eruo quetta túle – ar i Tehtele mo ua pole *aupanya – 36 ma quetilde ninna ye i Atar airitáne ar mentane mir i mar: Naiquétal, pan quenten: Nanye Eruion – ?” 37 Qui uan care Atarinyo cardar, áva save quetienyar. 38 Mal qui cáran tai, ar elde uar save quetienyar, sava i cardar, in istuvalde ar hanyuvalde in ea i Atar inyesse ar inye i Ataresse.” 39 Etta névelte ata mapa se, mal úşes et máltalto.
40 Ar oantes ata han Yordanna, i nómenna yasse sumbane Yoháno i yestasse, ar tasse lemnes. 41 Ar rimbali túler senna, ar quentelte: “Yoháno ua carne erya tanwa, mal ilqua ya Yoháno quente pa nér sina nanwa né.” 42 Ar rimbali sáver sesse tanome.

22 At that time there was the festival of renewal in Jerusalem. It was winter, 23 and Jesus walked in the temple, in Solomon’s columnade. 24 Therefore the Jews surrounded him and said to him: “How long will you keep us in uncertainty? If you are the Christ, tell us openly!” 25 Jesus answered them: “I told you, and yet you do not believe. The deeds that I am doing in my Father’s name, they witness about me. 26 But you do not believe, since you are not of my sheep. 27 My sheep listen to my voice, and I know them, and they follow me. 28 And I give them eternal life, and they will by no means ever be destroyed, and nobody will snatch them out of my hand. 29 My Father, who has given them to me, is greater than all others, and nobody can snatch them out of the Father’s hand. 30 I and the Father are [nát, dual] one.”
31 Again the Jews picked up stones to throw them at him. 32 Jesus answered them: “I showed you many good deeds from the Father. Concerning what [or, which] of those deeds do you want to throw stones at me?” 33 The Jews answered him: “We are throwing stones at you, not concerning [any] good deed, but concerning blasphemy, and since you who are a man makes [your]self a god!” 34 Jesus answered them: “Is it not written in your Law: I said: You are gods – ? 35 If he called gods the people to whom God’s word came – and the Scripture one cannot put away – 36 do you say to me whom the Father hallowed and sent into the world: You blaspheme, since I said, I am God’s son – ? 37 If I do not do my Father’s deeds, do not believe what I say [quetienyar “my sayings”]. 38 But if I am doing them, and you do not believe my sayings, believe the deeds, that you will know and you will understand that the Father is in me and I [am] in the Father.”  39 Therefore they tried again to seize him, but he escaped out of their hands [máltalto, distributive dual in ablative].
40 And he went away again beyond Jordan, to the place where John baptized in the beginning, and there he remained. 41 And numerous [people] came to him, and they said: “John did not do a single sign, but everything that John said about this man was true.” 42 And many believed in him there. 

RANTA 11 
Enge nér ye hlaiwa né, Lasarus Vetaniallo, i masto Mário yo Marşa néşaryo. 2 I María yeo háno Lásarus náne hlaiwa i nís né ye *elpane i Heru níşima millonen ar *parahtane taluryat findileryanen. 3 Etta i néşar mentaner quetta senna, quétala: “Heru, yé! ye melilye hlaiwa ná.” 4 Mal íre Yésus sa-hlasse quentes: “Hlíve sina ua qualmen, mal Eruo alcaren, in i Atanyondo samuva alcar sanen.”
	5 Yésus méle Marşa ar néşarya ar Lasarus. 6 Mal íre hlasses i hé hlaiwa ná, lemnes ré attasse mí nóme yasse enges. 7 Epeta, apa si, quentes i hildonnar: “Alve mene mir Yehúra ata.” 8 I hildor quenter senna: “Ravi, *şintanéya i Yúrar cestaner nahta lye sarnínen, ar ménal tar ata?” 9 Yésus hanquente: “Ear lúmi yunque aureo, lá? Qui aiquen vanta auresse, uas talta, pan cenis mar sino cala. 10 Mal qui aiquen vanta i lómisse, taltas, pan i cala lá ea sesse.”   
	11 Quentes nati sine, ar tá eques téna: “Lasarus meldolva acainuye serien, mal menuvan tar eccoitáven se.” 12 Etta i hildor quenter senna: “Heru, qui acainuyes serien, nauvas alwa.” 13 Yésus carampe pa qualmerya, mal té sanner i carampes pa serie lorniesse. 14 Etta Yésus tá quente téna pantave: “Lásarus aquálie; 15 ar márieldan nanye valima in únen tanome, i savuvalde. Mal alve lelya senna.” 16 Etta Tomas, ye estaina né i Onóno, quente i hyane hildonnar: “Alve lelya, yú elve, i qualuvalve óse.” 

CHAPTER 11
[There] was a man who was ill, Lazarus from Bethany, the village of Mary and Martha her sister. 2 The Mary whose brother Lazarus was ill was the woman who anointed the Lord with fragrant oil and dried his feet with her hair. 3 Therefore the sisters sent word to him, saying: “Lord, see! [he] whom you love is ill.” 4 But when Jeus heard it he said: “This illness is not for death, but for the glory of God, that the Son of Man will have glory by it.”
	5 Jesus loved Martha and her sister and Lazarus. 6 But when he heard that he was [Q: is] ill, he remained for two days in the place where he was. 7 Thereafter, after this, he said to the disciples: “Let us go into Judea again.” 8 The disciples said to him: “Rabbi, a short time ago the Jews sought to kill you with stones, and you are going there again?” 9 Jesus answered: “[There] are twelve hours of a day, no? If anyone walks at day, he does not fall, since he sees the light of this world. 10 But if anyone walks at night, he falls, since the light is not in him.”
	11 He said these things, and then he said to them: “Lazarus our friend has lain down to rest, but I will go there to wake him up.” 12 Therefore the disciples said to him: “Lord, if he has lain down to rest, he will be well.” 13 Jesus spoke about his death, but they thought that he spoke about resting in sleep. 14 Therefore Jesus then said to them openly: “Lazarus has died; 15 and for your good I am glad that I was not there, that you will believe. But let us go to him.” 16 Therefore Thomas, who was called the Twin, said to the other disciples: “Let us go, we too, that we will die with him.”

	17 Sie Yésus, íre túles, hirne i Lasarus *nollo caine rí canta i noirisse. 18 Vetania hare né Yerúsalemenna, ve er ar perta lár sallo. 19 Sie rimbali i Yúraron náner túlienwe Marşa yo Maríanna tiutáven tú pa hánotta. 20 Etta Marşa, íre hlasses i túle Yésus, velde se; mal María lemne i coasse. 21 Sie Marşa quente Yésunna: “Heru, au anel sís, hánonya úne qualina. 22 Ananta istan in ilqua ya arcal Erullo, Eru antauva lyen.” 23 Eque senna Yésus: “Hánolya ortuva.”  24 Marşa quente senna: “Istan in ortuvas i enortiesse i métima auresse.” 25 Eque senna Yésus: “Inye i enortie ar i coivie ná. Ye save nisse, ómu cé qualis, tuluva coivienna, 26 ar ilquen ye coirea ná ar save nisse laume oi qualuva. Ma savil si?” 27 Eques senna: “Ná, Heru, savin in elye ná i Hristo, i Eruion ye tulumne mir i mar.” 28 Ar quétiéla si lendes oa ar yalde María néşarya, quetila nuldave: “I *Peantar ea sís, ar yálas tye.” 29 Hé, hlarila si, oronte lintiénen ar lende senna.

	17 Thus Jesus, when he came, found that Lazarus had already been lying four days in the grave. 18 Bethany was near to Jerusalem, like one and a half league from it. 19 Thus many of [the] Jews were come to Martha and to Mary to comfort them [tú, dual] about their [-tta, dual] brother. 20 Therefore Martha, when she heard that Jesus came, met him; but Mary remained in the house. 21 Thus Martha said to Jesus: “Lord, if you were here, my brother was not dead. 22 And yet I know that everything that you make petition about from God, God will give you.” 23 Jesus said to her: “Your brother will rise.” 24 Martha said to him: “I know that he will rise in the resurrection [enortie, “re-rising”] on the last day.” 25 Jesus said to her: “I [am] the resurrection and the life. [He] who believes in me, [even] though if he dies, shall come to life, 26 and everyone who is alive and believes in me shall not ever die. Do you believe this?” 27 She said to him: “Yes, Lord, I believe that you are the Christ, the Son of God who was to come into the world.” 28 And after saying this she went away and called Mary her sister, saying secretly: “The Teacher is here, and he is calling you.” 29 She, hearing this, arose quickly and went to him.

	30 Yésus en úne túlienwa mir i masto, mal enges hinna i nómesse yasse Marşa velde se. 31 Íre i Yúrar i enger as María mí coa tiutáven se cenner in ortas ar menis ettenna, etta hilyaneltes, intyala i ménanes i noirinna *nítien tasse. 32 Ar sie María, íre túles i nómenna yasse enge Yésus ar cenne se, lantane epe taluryat, quétala senna: “Heru, au anel sís hánonya úne qualina!” 33 Sie Yésus, íre cennes i *nítas, ar i *nítar i Yúrar i enger óse, ñónane faireryasse ar náne pálina. 34 Ar eques: “Masse apánieldes?” Quentelte senna: “Heru, tula ar cena.” 35 Yésus *nítane. 36 Etta i Yúrar quenter: “Yé manen méleses!” 37 Mal ennoli mici te quenter: “Ma nér sina ye latyane i lacenítio hendu ua polde pusta quén sina qualiello?” 
	38 Sie Yésus, ñóniéla ata insesse, túle i noirinna. Sá náne rotto, ar ondo caine epe sa. 39 Eque Yésus: “Á mapa oa i ondo!” Marşa, i qualino néşa, quente senna: “Heru, sí ea holme, an acaities tasse auressen canta!” 40 Eque senna Yésus: “Ma uan quente lyenna i qui savil, cenuval Eruo alcar?” 41 Tá nampelte oa i ondo. Yésus ortane henyat ar quente: “Atar, hantan tyen pan ahlárietyen. 42 Inye ista in illume hlarityen, mal i márien i şango ya tára sís carampen, i savuvalte i tyé mentane ni.” 43 Ar quétiéla si yámes taura ómanen: “Lasarus, ettula!” 44 Ar i quáliéla nér ettúle, hampa taluryatse ar máryatse vaimainen, ar arwa lanneo nútina or cendelerya. Eque téna Yésus: “Áse lerya ar lava sen lelya!”

	30 Jesus still had not come into the village, but he was still in the place where Martha met him. 31 When the Jews who were with Mary in the house to comfort her saw that she arose and went out [Q: she arises and goes out], they therefore followed her, supposing that she was going to the grave to weep there.  32 And so Mary, when she came to the place where Jesus was and saw him, fell before his feet, saying to him: “Lord, if you were here my brother was not dead!” 33 Thus Jesus, when he saw that she cried [Q: cries], and that the Jews who were with her cried [Q: cry], groaned in his spirit and was shaken. 34 And he said: “Where have you put him?” They said to him: “Lord, come and see.” 35 Jesus cried. 36 Therefore the Jews said: “See how he loved him!” 37 But some among them said: “Could not this man who opened the blind [man]’s eyes stop this man from dying?” 
	38 Thus Jesus, after groaning again in [him]self, came to the tomb. It was a cave, and a stone lay before it. 39 Jesus said: “Take away the stone.” Martha, the sister of the dead, said to him: “Lord, [by] now [there] is a stench, for he has lain there for four days!” 40 Jesus said to her: “Did I not say to you that if you believe, you will see God’s glory?” 41 Then they took away the stone. Jesus raised his eyes and said: “Father, I thank you because you have heard me. 42 I know that you always hear me, but for the good of the crowd that is standing here I spoke, that they will believe that you sent me.” 43 And after saying this he cried out in a mighty voice: “Lazarus, come out!” 44 And the man having died came out, restrained on his feet and on his hands by wraps, and having a cloth bound over his face. Jesus said to them: “Release him and let him go!”

45 Etta rimbali i Yúraron i náner túlienwe Maríanna ar cenner ya carnes sáver sesse. 46 Mal ennoli mici te lender i Farisannar ar nyarner tien i nati yar Yésus carne. 47 Etta i hére *airimor ar i Farisar ócomner i Combe ar quenter: “Mana caruvalve, pan atan sina care rimbe tanwali? 48 Qui lavilve sen *cacare sie, illi savuvar sesse, ar Rómear tuluvar ar mapuvar oa yúyo aire nómelva ar liendelva.” 49 Mal quén mici te, Caiafas, ye náne i héra *airimo loa yanasse, quente téna: “Laume istalde erya nat, 50 ar ualde hanya i ná len aşea in er atan qualuva rá i lien, in i quanda liende lá nauva nancarna.” 51 Mal ta uas quente insenen, mal pan anes i héra *airimo, quentes ve Erutercáno i náne Yésus martyana qualien i lienden, 52 ar lá rie i lienden, mal polieryan comya mir er i Eruhíni i nar vintane. 53 Etta sana aurello carnelte panor nahtien se,
54 Etta Yésus ua ambe vantane pantave mici Yúrar, mal oantes talo i nórenna hare i ravandanna, ostonna estaina Efraïm, ar tasse lemnes as hildoryar. 55 Sí i Lahtie Yúraron hare né, ar rimbali lender ama et i ménallon poitien inte.
56 Etta cestanelte Yésus ar quentelte, quén i exenna: “Mana sánalde? I laume tuluvas i aşarenna?” 57 I hére *airimor ar i Farisar náner cániéla i qui aiquen ista masse eas, mauya sen nyare, polieltan mapa se. 

45 Therefore many of the Jews who had come to Mary and saw what he did believed in him. 46 But some among them went to the Pharisees and told them the things that Jesus did. 47 Therefore the chief priests and the Pharisees gathered the Council and said: “What are we to do, since this man does many signs? 48 If we let him continue so, all will believe in him, and [the] Romans will come and will take away both our holy place and our nation.” 49 But one among them, Caiaphas, who was the chief priest that year, said to them: “You do not know a single thing, 50 and you do not understand that it is beneficial for you that a single man is to die on behalf of the people, that the whole nation will not be undone.” 51 But that he did not say of himself, but because he was the chief priest, he spoke as a prophet that Jesus was destined to die for the nation, 52 and not only for the nation, but for him to be able to gather into one the Children of God that are scattered. 53 Therefore from that day they made plans to kill him.
54 Therefore Jesus did not [any]more walk openly among [the] Jews, but he went away from there to the land near to the desert, to a city called Ephraim, and there he remained with his disciples. 55 Now the Passover of [the] Jews was near, and many came up out of the regions to purify themselves.
56 Therefore they sought Jesus and said, one to the other: “What are you thinking? That he will not come to the festival at all?” 57 The chief priests and the Pharisees had commanded that if anyone knew [Q: knows]  where he was [Q: is], it obliges for him to tell, for them to be able to seize him. 

RANTA 12
Sie Yésus, auri enque nó i aşar, túle Vetanianna, yasse enge Lásarus ye Yésus ortane qualinallon. 2 Etta carnelte sen *şinyemat, ar Marşa *veuyane, mal Lásarus enge imíca i cainer ara i sarno óse. 3 Tá María nampe *lungwe níşima millova – anwa, ammirwa *alanarda – ar *elpane Yésuo talu ar *parahtane taluryat findileryanen. I ne i níşima millo quante i coa. 4 Mal Yúras Iscariot, quén mici hildoryar, ye *vartumne se, quente: 5 “Manen níşima millo sina úne vácina lenári húmi nelden ar i tyelpe antana i únain?” 6 Quentes si, lá pan i únar náner valdie sen, mal pan anes arpo: Samila i tyelpecolca nampes yar náner panyane sasse. 7 Etta eque Yésus: “Áva hranga se! Lava sen hepitas i auren yasse nauvan talana sapsanyanna. 8 An i únar illume samuvalde mici le, mal ní ualde illume same.”
	9 Íre hoa şanga Yúraiva hanyaner in eas tasse, túlelte, lá rie Yésunen, mal yú cenien Lásarus, ye ortanes qualinallon. 10 Mal i hére *airimor carner panor nahtien yú Lásarus, 11 pan issenen rimbali Yúraron lender tanna ar sáver Yésusse. 
	12 I hilyala auresse, íre i hoa şanga ya náne túlienwa i aşarenna hlasse i Yésus túla Yerusalemenna, 13 nampelte olvali *nindornion ar etemenner velien se. Ar yámelte: “Hosanna! Aistana ná ye tule i Héruo essenen, i aran Israélo!” 14 Mal híriéla nessa *pellope hamunes senna, ve técina ná: 15 “Áva ruce, Síoniel! Yé! Aranelya túla, hamila *pellopeo onnasse.” 16 I hildor uar hanyane nati sine i yestallo, mal íre Yésus náne carna alcarinqua, tá enyaldelte manen nati sine náner técine pa se ar i carnelte sie sen.
	17 Sie *vettaner i queni i enger óse íre yaldes Lásarus et i noirillo ar se-ortane qualinallon. 18 Sinen i şanga, pan hlasselte i carnes tanwa sina, yú velder se. 19 Etta i Farisar quenter mici inte: “Cenilde i polilde care munta. Yé! I mar elendie cata se.”

CHAPTER 12
Thus Jesus, six days before the festival, came to Bethany, where was Lazarus whom Jesus raised from [the] dead. 2 Therefore they made for him an evening meal, and Mary served, but Lazarus was among those who lay by the table with him. 3 Then Mary took a pound of fragrant oil – genuine, most precious nard – and anointed Jesus’ feet and dried his feet with her hair. The scent of the fragrant oil filled the house. 4 But Judas Iscariot, one among his disciples, who was going to betray him, said: 5 “How [is it that] this fragrant oil was not sold for three hundred denarii and the money given to the poor?” 6 He said this, not because the poor were important to him, but because he was a thief: Having the moneybox he took  [the coins] that were put in it. 7 Therefore Jesus said: “Do not hinder her! Let her keep it for the day when I shall be brought to my grave. 8 For the poor you always have with you, but me you do not always have.”
	9 When a huge crowd of Jews understood that he was [Q: is] there, they came, not solely because of Jesus, but also to see Lazarus, whom he raised from [the] dead. 10 But the chief priests made plans to kill Lazarus as well, 11 since because of him many of [the] Jews went there and believed in Jesus.
	12 On the following day, when the huge crowd that had come to the festival heard that Jesus was coming [Q: is coming] to Jerusalem, 13 they took branches of palm trees and went out to meet him. And they cried: “Hosanna! Blessed is [he] who comes in the name of the Lord, the king of Israel!” 14 But after finding a young ass he sat down on it, as is written: 15 “Do not fear, daughter of Zion! Look! Your king is coming, sitting on the colt [onna, child/offspring] of an ass.” 16 The disciples did not understand these things from the beginning, but when Jesus was made glorious , then they recalled how these things were written about him and that they did so to him.
	17 Thus [they] witnessed, the people that were with him when he called Lazarus out of the tomb and raised him from [the] dead. 18 Because of this the crowd, when they heard that he did this sign, also met him. 19 Therefore the Pharisees said among themselves: “You see that you can do nothing. Look! The world has gone behind him.”  

	20 Enger Hellenyali mici i lender ama *tyerien i aşaresse. 21 Etta túlelte Filipenna ye náne Vestairallo Alileo, ar arcanelte sello, quétala: “Hér, merilme cene Yésus.” 22 Filip túle ar nyarne Andréan. Andréas ar Filip túler ar nyarner Yésun.
	23 Mal Yésus hanquente túna, quétala: “I lúme utúlie yasse i Atanyondo nauva *alcaryaina. 24 Násie, násie quetin lenta: Qui ore erdeo ua lanta mir i talan ar quale, lemyas i erya ore; mal qui qualis, tá colis olya yáve. 25 Ye mele coivierya nancare sa, mal ye teve coivierya mar sinasse varyuva sa oira coivien. 26 Qui aiquen mere *veuya ni, lava sen hilya ni, ar yasse inye ea, tasse yú núronya euva. 27 Sí feanya tarcina ná, ar mana quetuvan? Atar, áni rehta et lúme sinallo! Mal casta sinan utúlien lúme sinanna. 28 Atar, á *alcarya esselya!” Etta óma túle et menello: “Yúyo *alcaryanenyes ar *alcaryauvanyes ata!”
	29 Etta i şanga ya tarne tasse ar sa-hlasse quente in anes hundie. Exeli quenter: “Vala acarpie senna.” 30 Yésus hanquente ar eque: “Óma sina ua túle ninya márien, mal *lenyan. 31 Sí mar sina námaina ná, sí i túr mar sino nauva hátina ettenna! 32 Ar inye, íre nauvan ortana et cemello, tucuva ilye atani ninna.” 33 Mal sá quentes tanien i nostale qualmeo ya qualumnes. 34 Etta i şanga hanquente senna: “Ahlárielme i Şanyello i termare i Hristo tennoio, ar manen lertal quete i mauya i Atanyondon náve ortana? Man ná Atanyondo sina?” 35 Yésus etta quente téna: “I cala euva mici le an şinta lúmesse. Á vanta íre samilde i cala, hya mornie turúva le, an ye vanta i morniesse ua ista yasse lelyas. 36 Íre samilde i cala, sava i calasse, i nauvalde yondor calo.”

	20 [There] were some Greeks [or, Hellenes] among [those] who went up to worship at the festival. 21 Therefore they came to Philip who was from Bethsaida of Galilee, and they asked of him, saying: “Sir, we want to see Jesus.” 22 Philip came and told Andrew. Andrew and Philip came and told Jesus.
	23 But Jesus answered them, saying: “The hour has come when the Son of Man will be glorified. 24 Truly, truly I say to you: If a grain of seed does not fall into the ground and dies, it remains the [/ that] single grain; but if it dies, then it bears much fruit. 25 [He] who loves his life will destroy it, but [he] who hates his life in this world will protect it for eternal life. 26 If anyone wants to serve me, let him follow me, and where I am, there my servant will be also. 27 Now my soul is troubled, and what am I to say? Father, save me from this hour! But for this reason I have come to this hour. 28 Father, glorify your name!” Therefore a voice came out of heaven: “I both glorified it and I shall glorify it again!”
	29 Therefore the crowd that stood there and heard it said that it was thunder. Others said: “An angel has spoken to him.” 30 Jesus answered and said: “This voice did not come for my good, but for yours. 31 Now this world is being judged, now the ruler of this world will be thrown out! 32 And I, when I shall be lifted up out of earth, will draw all men to me.” 33 But that he said to show the kind of death that he was going to die. 34 Therefore the crowd answered him: “We have heard from the Law that the Christ remains forever, and how may you say that [it] is necessary for the Son of Man to be lifted up? Who is this Son of Man?” 35 Jesus therefore said to them: “The light will be among you for a short while more. Walk while you have the light, or darkness will conquer you, for [he] who walks in the dark does not know where he goes. 36 When you have the light, believe in the light, that you will be sons of light.” 

	Nati sine Yésus quente, ar oantes ar nurtane inse tello. 37 Mal ómu anes cáriéla ta rimbe tanwali opo te, ualte sáve sesse, 38 *amaquatien i quetta ya quente Yesaia i Erutercáno: “Héru, man asávie ya ahlárielme? Ar i Héruo ranco, ana man anes apantana?” 39 I cesta yanen ua ence tien save ná i ata Yesaia quente: 40 “Acáries hendultat laceníti ar endalta sarda, i ualte cene hendultanten ar hanya endaltanen ar quere inte, i nestumnenyet.” 41 Yesaia quente nati sine pan cennes alcarerya ar carampe pa se. 42 Ananta rimbali yú i turcoron sáver sesse, mal Farisainen ualte *etequentane se, i lá nauvanelte hehtane i *yomencoallo. 43 An mélelte i alcar atanillon ambe lá i alcar Erullo.
	44 Mal Yésus yáme ar eque: “Ye save nisse ua save nisse, mal yesse ni-mentane, 45 ar ye cene ní cene yú ye ni-mentane. 46 Utúlien ve cala mir i mar, in ilquen ye save nisse ua lemyuva i morniesse. 47 Mal qui aiquen hlare quetienyar ar ua cime tai, inye ua name se, an túlen, lá namien i mar, man rehtien i mar.  48 Ye *úcime ní ar ua came quetienyar same ya name se. I quetta ya inye equétie ná ya namuva se i métima auresse; 49 pan inye ua equétie imninen, mal i Atar ye ni-mentane, isse ánies nin canwa pa ya quetuvan ar carpuvan. 50 Ar istan i canwarya oira coivie ná. Etta, i nati yar quetin – tambe i Atar equétie tai ninna, sie carpan.

	These things Jesus said, and he went away and hid himself from them. 37 But though he had done so many signs in front of them, they did not believe in him, 38 in order to fulfill the word that Isaiah the Prophet spoke: “Lord, who has believed what we have heard? And the arm of the Lord, to whom was it revealed?” 39 The reason why [yanen “by which”] it was not possible for them to believe is that again Isaiah said: 40 “I will make their eyes blind and their heart hard, that they do not see with their eyes and understand with their hearts and turn [Q: turn themselves], [so] that I would heal them.” 41 Isaiah said these things because he saw his glory and spoke about him. 42 And yet many also of the rulers believed in him, but because of the Pharisees they did not confess him, that they that they were not going to be excluded from the synagogue. 43 For they loved the glory of [or “from”, -llon] men more than the glory of [/from] God.
	44 But Jesus cried [out] and said: “[He] who believes in me does not believe in me, but in [him] who sent me, 45 and [he] who see me sees also [he] who sent me. 46 I have come as a light into the world, and everyone who believes in me shall not remain in the darkness. 47 But if anyone hears my sayings and does not heed them, I do not judge him, for I came, not to judge the world, but to save the world. 48 [He] who disregards me and does not keep my sayings has [something] that judges him. The word that I have spoken is what shall judge him in the last day; 49 since I have not spoken by myself, but the Father who sent me, he has given me command about what I will l say and I will speak. 50 And I know that his command is eternal life. Therefore, the things that I speak – as the Father has spoken them to me, so I speak. 

RANTA 13
Nó i aşar i Lahtiéno Yésus sinte i sí lúmerya utúlie autien mar sinallo menien i Atarenna, ar méliéla véraryar i enger i mardesse, méleset tenna i metta. 2 Mátanelte i şinyemat, ar i Arauco náne no¨vo pániéla mir endarya Yúras Iscariot Símondion i se-*vartumnes. 3 Yésus, istala in i Atar ánie ilye nati máryanta, ar in ettúles Erullo ar menuva Erunna, 4 oronte i şinyematello ar panyane oa larmaryar. Nampes *paşelanne ar *quiltane inse. Epeta ulyanes nén mir salpe, ar *yestanes sove i hildoron talu ar *parahta tú i *paşelannenen yanen anes *quiltana. 6 Sie túles Símon Péterenna. Hé quentes senna: “Heru, ma sóval talunyat?” 7 Yésus hanquente ar eque henna: “Ya cáran ual hanya sí, mal hanyuvalyes apa nati sine.” 8 Símon Péter quente senna: “Elye laume oi sovuva ninye talu!” Yésus hanquente henna: “Qui uan sove lye, ual same ranta óni.” 9 Símon Péter quente senna: “Heru, lá talunyat erye, mal yú mányat ar carinya!” 10 Yésus quente henna: “Ye osóvie inse ua same maure i *aiqua nauva sóvina hequa taluryat, mal aqua poica ná. Ar elde nar poice – mal lá illi.” 11 An sintes i nér vartala se. Etta quentes: “Ualde illi poice.”
	12 Sóviéla talultat ar mápiéla larmaryar cainunes ata ara i sarno ar quente téna: “Ma istalde ya acárien len? 13 Quetilde ninna, *Peantar ar Heru, ar quetilde mai, an ta nanye. 14 Etta, qui inye, i Heru ar i *Peantar, sóve taluldat, yú lenya rohta ná i sovilde quén i exeo talu. 15 An apánien len *epemma, i ve inye acárie, yú elde caruvar. 16 Násie, násie quetin lenna: Núro ua túra epe herurya, hya mentana quén lá ye mentane se. 17 Qui istalde nati sine, valime nalde qui carilde tai. 18 Uan quete pa le illi; istan i icílien. Mal martas *amaquatien i tehtele: Ye mante massanya equérie pontirya ninna. 19 Lú sinallo nyarin len nó martas; sie, íre martuvas, savuvalde in inye sé ná. 20 Násie, násie quetin lenna: Ye came aiquen ye inye menta came ní, ar ye came ní, came ye ni-mentane.”

CHAPTER 13
Before the festival of the Passover, Jesus knew that now his time had [Q: has] come to pass away from this world to go to the Father, and after loving his own who were in the world, he loved them until the end. 2 They were eating the evening meal, and the Devil had beforehand put [it] into the heart of Judas Iscariot son of Simon that he was going to betray him. 3 Jesus, knowing that the Father had [Q: has] given all things into his hands, and that he had [Q: has] come forth from God and was to go [Q: will go]to God, 4 arose from the evening meal and put away his raiments. He took a linen cloth and girded himself. Thereafter he poured water into a bowl, and he started to wash the feet of the disciples and to dry them with linen cloth with which he was girded. 6 Thus he came to Simon Peter. He said to him: “Lord, are you washing my feet?” 7 Jesus answered and said to him: “What I am doing you do not understand now, but you will understand it after these things.” 8 Simon Peter said to him: “By no means will you ever wash my feet!” Jesus answered him: “If I do not wash you, you do not have [any] part with me.” 9 Simon Peter said to him: “Lord, not my feet only, but also my hands and my head!” 10 Jesus answered him: “[He] who has washed himself does not have need that anything is to be washed except his feet, but is completely clean. And you are clean – but not all.” 11 For he knew the man betraying him. Therefore he said: “You are not all clean.” 
	12 After washing their feet and taking his robes he laid down again by the table and said to them: “Do you know what I have done to you? 13 You say to me: Teacher and Lord, and you speak well, for that I am. 14 Therefore, if I, the Lord and the Teacher, washed your feet, [it] is also your duty [rohta “debt”] that you wash one another’s feet. 15 For I have set for you an example, [so] that as I have done, you too will do. 16 Truly, truly I say to you: A servant is not greater than his lord, or a person sent [forth] than [the one] who sent him. 17 If you know these things, happy you are if you do them. 18 I do not speak of you all; I know [the ones] that I have chosen. But it happens to fulfill the scripture: [He] who ate my bread has turned his back on me. 19 From this moment I tell you before it happens; thus, when it shall happen, you will believe that I am he. 20 Truly, truly I say to you: [He] who receives anybody that I send receives me, and [he] who receives me, receives [him] who sent me.”

	21 Apa quetie nati sine, Yésus náne tarcina fairesse, ar *vettanes ar quente: “Násie, násie quetin lenna: Quén imíca le *vartuva ni.” 22 I hildor yenter quén i exenna, lá hanyala pa man quentes. 23 Epe Yésuo súma caine quén hildoryaron, ye Yésus méle. 24 Etta Símon Péter hiutane quén tananna ar eque senna: “Nyara man ná pa ye quétas!” 25 Sie i hildo, talta Yésuo ambostenna, quente senna: “Heru, man náse?” 26 Etta Yésus hanquente: “Náse yen antauvan i ranta massava ya sumban.”Sumbiéla i ranta sa-antanes Yúras yondoryan Símon Iscáriot. 27 Ar cámiéla i ranta, tá Satan mittane he. Etta Yésus quente henna: “Ya cáral, ása care lintiénen!” 28 Mal *úquen imíca i cainer ara i sarno sinte i casta yanen quentes henna.si. 29 An ennoli sanner, pan Yúras sáme i tyelpecolca, i Yésus quente senna: “Vaca yaiva samilve maure i aşaren,” hya i hé antauva nat i penyain. 30 Etta, cámiéla i ranta, hé etemenne mí imya lú. Ar enge lóme. 
	31 Sie, apa hé etemenne, Yésus quente: “Sí i Atanyondo ná *alcaryaina, ar Eru *alcaryaina ná issen. 32 Qui Eru *alcaryaina ná issenen, Eru immo yú *alcaryauva sé, ar *alcaryauvases rongo. 33 Hinyar, ean aselde an şinta lúmesse. Cestuvalden, ar tambe quenten i Yúrannar: Yanna inye auta elde uar pole tule, síve quetin yú eldenna sí. 34 Vinya axan antan len: mele quén i exe. Aqua ve inye emélie le, sie yú elde na meluvar quén i exe. 35 Sinen illi istuvar i nalde hildonyar, qui samilde melme mici inde.”
	36 Símon Péter quente senna: “Heru, manna autal?” Yésus hanquente: “Yanna autan ual pole hilya ni sí, mal hilyuval apa.” 37 Eque senna Péter: “Heru, manen uan pole hilya lye sí? Antauvan coivienya elyen!” 38 Yésus hanquente: “Ma antauval coivielya inyen? Násie, násie quetin lyenna: Tocot laume lamyuva nó alálielyen nel.”

	21 After saying these things, Jesus was troubled in spirit, and he witnessed and said: “Truly, truly I say to you: One among you will betray me.” 22 The disciples looked on one another, not understanding about whom he spoke. 23 Before Jesus’ bosom [there] lay one of his disiciples, whom Jesus loved. 24 Therefore Simon Peter gave a hint to that one and said to him: “Tell who [it] is that he is talking about!” 25 Thus the disciple, leaning towards Jesus’ chest, said to him: “Lord, who is he?” 26 Therefore Jesus answered: “He is [the one] to whom I will give the piece of bread that I dip.” After dipping the piece he gave it to Judas the son of Simon Iscariot. 27 And after receiving the piece, then Satan entered him. Therefore Jesus said to him: “What you are doing, do it quickly!” 28 But nobody among [those] who were lying by the table knew the reason why [yanen “by which”] he said this to him. 29 And some thought, since Judas had the money box, that Jesus said to him: “Buy [the things] that we have need of for the festival,” or that he was to [Q: will] give something to the poor. 30 Therefore, having received the piece, he went out in the same moment. And [it] was night.
	31 Thus, after he went out, Jesus said: “Now the Son of Man is being glorified, and God is being glorified by means of him. 32 If God is being glorified by means of him, God himself will also glorify him, and he will glorify him soon. 33 My children, I am with you for a little while more. You will seek me, and as I said to the Jews: Where I am going away you cannot come, so I say also to you now. 34 A new command I give you: to love one another. Just as I have loved you, so you too are to love one another. 35 By this all shall know that you are my disciples, if you have love among yourselves.”
	36 Simon Peter said to him: “Lord, where do you go away to?” Jesus answered: “Where I am go away you cannot follow me now, but you will follow after[wards].” 37 Peter said to him: “Lord, how [is it that] I cannot follow you now? I will give my life for you!” 38 Jesus answered: “Will you give your life for me? Truly, truly I say to you: A cock will by no means sound before you have denied me thrice.”

RANTA 14
”Áva lave endaldan náve tarcina. Sava Erusse; sava yú nisse. 2 I coasse Atarinyava ear rimbe şambeli. Qui lá, nyarnen len, pan autan manwien nóme len. 3 Ente, qui autan ar manwa nóme len, entuluvan ar le-camuva inyenna, i yasse inye ea yú elde euvar. 4 Ar yanna autan istalde i tie.”
	5 Eque senna Tomas: “Heru, ualme ista yanna autal. Manen istalme i tie?” 6 Yésus quente senna: “Inye i tie ar i nanwie ar i coivie. *Úquen tule i Ataranna hequa ter ní. 7 Au sintelden, sintelde yú Atarinya. Lú sinallo istaldes ar ecénieldes.”
	8 Eque senna Filip: “Heru, ámen tana i Atar, ar ta farya men.” 9 Yésus quente senna: “Ta andave engien aselde, Filip, ananta ual ista ni? Ye ecénie ní ecénie i Atar. Manen ece lyen quete: Ámen tana i Atar – ? 10 Ma ual save in inye ea i Ataresse ar i Atar inyesse? I nati yar quetin lenna uan quete et inyello, mal i Atar ye lemya nisse cára cardaryar. 11 Á save in inye ea i Ataresse ar i Atar inyesse; qui lá, á save i cardainen ve taiti! 12 Násie, násie quetin lenna: Ye save nisse, isse caruva yú i cardar yar inye care; ar caruvas cardar túre lá tai, pan inye auta i Atarenna. 13 Ar ilqua ya arcalde essenyanen, ta caruvan, in i Atarn nauva *alcaryana i Yondonen. 14 Qui arcalde nat essenyanen, caruvanyes.
	15 Qui melilden, himyuvalde axaninyar, 16 ar inye arcuva i Atarello, ar antauvas len hyana şámo ya euva aselde tennoio, 17 i Faire nanwiéva, ya i mar ua pole came, pan loitas cene sa ar ista sa véla. Elde istar sa, pan lemyas aselde ar ea lesse. 18 Uan hehtuva le *nostarence. Túlan lenna. 19 Apa an şinta lúme i mar ua cenuva ni ambe, mal elde cenuvar ni, pan nanye coirea ar elde nauvar coirie. 20 Enta auresse istuvalde in inye ea Atarinyasse ar elde nisse ar inye lesse. 21 Ye same axaninyar ar himya tai, isse ná ye mele ni. Ente, ye mele ní nauva mélaina lo Atarinya, ar inye meluva se ar apantuva imne sen.”

CHAPTER 14
“Do not let your heart be troubled. Believe in God; believe also in me. 2 In my Father’s house [there] are many rooms. If not, I told you [so], since I am going away to prepare a place for you. 3 Furthermore, if I go away and prepare a place for you, I shall return and receive you to myself, that where I am you too will be. 4 And where I am going away you know the way.”
5 Thomas said to him: “Lord, we do not know where you are going away to. How do we know the way?” 6 Jesus said to him: “I [am] the way and the truth and the life. No one comes to the Father except through me. 7 If you knew me, you knew also my Father. From this moment you know him and you have seen him.”
8 Philip said to him: “Lord, show us the Father, and that is enough [farya “suffices”] for us.” 9 Jesus said to him: “So long I have been with you [pl.], Philip, and yet you [sg.] do not know me? [He] who has seen me has seen the Father. How can you [sg.] say: Show us the Father – ?10 Do you [sg.] not believe that I am in the Father and the Father in me? The things that I have spoken to you [pl.] I have not spoken out of myself, but the Father who remains in me is doing his deeds. 11 Believe me that I am in the Fatehr and the Father in me; if not, believe because of the deeds as such! 12 Truly, truly I say to you: [He] who believes in me, he will do also the deeds that I do; and he will do deeds greater than they [or, those], since I am going away to the Father. 13 And everything that you pray for in my name, that I will do, [so] that] the Father will be glorified by means of the Son. 14 If you pray for [any]thing in my name, I will do it.
15 If you love me, you will remain in my commandments, 16 and I will ask of the Father, and he will give you another helper that will be with you forever, 17 the Spirit of truth, that the world cannot receive, since it fails to see it and know it alike. You know it, since it remains in you and is in you. 18 I do not leave you orphaned. I am coming to you. 19 After a little while more the world will not see me [any]more, but you will see me, since I am alive and you shall be alive. 20 On that day you will know that I am in my Father and you in me and I in you. 21 [He] who has my commandments and abides by them, he is [the one] who loves me. Furthermore, [he] who loves me shall be loved by my Father, and I will love him and will reveal [my]self to him.”

	22 Yúras, lá Iscáriot, quente senna: “Heru, mana amartie, pan apantuval imle men ar lá i marden?” 23 Yésus hanquente ar eque: “Qui aiquen mele ni, himyuvas quettanya, ar Atarinya meluva se, ar tuluvamme senna ar maruvat óse. 24 Ye ua mele ni ua himya quettanyar, ar i quetta ya hláral ua ninya, mal i Ataro ye ni-mentane. 
	25 Íre lemyan aselde equétien nati sine len. 26 Mal i şámo, i Aire Fea, ye i Atar mentauva essenyanen, isse peantauva le pa ilye nati ar tyaruva le enyale ilqua ya nyarnen len. 27 Raine tyarin lemya aselde, rainenya antan len. Uan anta sa ve i mar anta. Áva lave endaldan náve tarcina hya ruhtana! 28 Hlasselde i quenten lenna in autan ar nanwenuva lenna. Au mélelden, sámelde alasse menienyanen i Atarenna, pan i Atar ná túra lá ni. 29 Ar sí anyárien len nó martas, in, íre é martas, savuvalde. 30 Uan carpuva ole aselde ho sí, an i mardo turco túla. Ar uas same túre or ni, 31 mal in istuva i mar i melin i Atar, etta cáran ve i canwa ya i Atar ánie nin. Á orta, alve lelya silo!”

	22 Judas, not Iscariot, said to him: “Lord, what has happened, since you will reveal [your]self to us and not to the world?” 23 Jesus answered him and said: “If anyone loves me, he will abide by my word, and my Father will love him, and we [dual] will come to him and will dwell with him. 24 [He] who does not love me does not abide by my words, and the word that you are hearing is not mine, but the Father’s who sent me.
	25 While I remain with you I have spoken these things to you. 26 But the helper, the Holy Spirit, whom the Father shall send in my name, he will teach you all things and will make you remember everything that I told you. 27 Peace I let remain with you, my peace I give you. I do not give it as the world gives. Do not let your heart be troubled or frightened! 28 You heard that I said to you that I am going away and I will return to you. If you loved me, you had joy because of my going to the Father, since the Father is greater than I. 29 And now I have told you before it happens, that, when it does happen, you will believe. 30 I will not talk much with you from now [on], for the ruler of the world is coming. And he does not have power over me, 31 but that the world will know that I love the Father, therefore I am doing according to the command that the Father has given me. Rise, let us go from here!” 

RANTA 15
”Inye i nanwa liantasse, ar Atarinya i *alamo ná. 2 Ilya olva nisse lá colila yáve mapas oa, ar ilya ya cole yáve poitas, colieryan amba yáve. 3 Elde nar *nollo poice i quettanen ya equétien len. 4 Á lemya nisse, ar inye lesse. Tambe i olva ua pole cole yáve qui uas lemya mí liantasse, síve elde uar pole, qui ualde lemya nisse. 5 Inye i liantasse ná, elde nar i olvar. Ye lemya nisse, ar ní sesse, isse cole olya yáve; pan oa nillo polilde care munta. 6 Qui aiquen ua lemya nisse, náse hátina ettenna ve olva ar ole parca, ar queni hostar tane olvar ar hatir tai mir i ruine, ar nalte urtane. 7 Qui lemyalde nisse ar quetienyar lemyar lesse, á arca ilqua ya merilde, ar martuvas len. 8 Atarinya *alcaryaina ná sinen, i colilde olya yáve ar tanar inde ve hildonyar. 9 Síve i Atar emélie ní ar inye emélie lé, á lemya melmenyasse! 10 Qui himyalde axaninyar, lemyuvalde melmenyasse, síve inye ihímie i Ataro axani ar lemya melmeryasse.

CHAPTER 15 
“I [am] the true vine, and my Father is the cultivator. 2 Every branch in me not bearing fruit he takes away, and every [one] that bears fruit he cleanses, for it to bear more fruit. 3 You are already clean, by the word that I have spoken to you. 4 Remain in me, and I in you. As the branch cannot bear fruit if it does not remain in the vine, so you cannot [either], if you do not remain in me. 5 I am the vine, you are the branches. [He] who remains in me, and I in him, he bears much fruit; for away from me you can do nothing. 6 If anybody does not remain in me, he is thrown outside as a branch and becomes dry, and people gather those branches and throw them into the fire, and they are burnt. 7 If you remain in me and my sayings remain in you, pray for everything that you want, and it will happen for you. 8 My father is glorified by this, that you bear much fruit and show yourselves as my disciples. 9 As the Father has loved me and I have loved you, remain in my love! 10 If you abide by my commandments, you will remain in my love, as I have abided by the Father’s commandments and remain in his love.

	11 Nati sine equétien len, in alassenya euva lesse ar alasselda nauva carna quanta. 12 Si axaninya ná, i melilde quén i exe ve emélien lé. 13 *Úquen same melme túra lá si, i quén anta coivierya meldoryain. 14 Elde nar meldonyar qui carilde ya canin len. 15 Uan ambe esta le móli, pan mól ua ista ya herurya care. Mal estanienye le meldor, an ilqua ya ahlárien Atarinyallo acárien sinwa len. 16 Elde uar cille ní, mal inye cille lé, ar apánien le etemenien ar colien yáve, ar yávelda lemyuva, in i Atar len-antauva ya arcalde essenyanen. 17 Nati sine canin len, i meluvalde quén i exe. 18 Qui i mar teve le, istalde i téves ní nó le. 19 Au anelde ranta i mardo, i mar méle vérarya. Mal pan ualde ranta i mardo, mal inye icílie le et i mardello, sinen i mar teve le. 20 Enyala i quetta ya quenten lenna: Mól ua túra lá herurya. Qui ní roitanelte, yú lé roituvalte. Qui ihímielte quettanya, himyuvalte yú lenya. 21 Mal caruvalte ilye nati sine len essenyanen, pan ualte ista ye ni-mentane. 22 Au uan túle ar carampe téna, ualte sáme úcare; mal sí ualte same casta antáven pa úcarelta. 23 Ye teve ní teve yú Atarinya. 24 Qui uan acárie mici te i cardar yar *úquen hyana acárie, ualte sáme úcare; mal sí ecénielte ar eyétielte ní ar Atarinya véla. 25 Mal martas *amaquatien i quetta técina Şanyeltasse: Tévelten pen casta. 26 Íre i Şámo tuluva ye inye mentuva lenna i Atarello, i Faire nanwiéva, ye ettule i Atarello, isse *vettuva pa ní; 27 yú lé *vettuvar, pan engielde asinye i yestallo.”

	11 These things I have spoken to you, that my joy will be in you and your joy will be made full. 12 This is my commandment, that you love one another as I have loved you. 13 Nobody has a love greater than this, that a person gives his life for his friends. 14 You are my friends if you do what I command you. 15 I do not [any]more call you slaves, because a slave does not know what his lord does. 16 You did not choose me, but I chose you, and I have appointed you to go out and to bear fruit, and your fruit will remain, [so] that the Father will give you what you pray for in my name. 17 These things I command you, that you will love one another. 18 If the world hates you, you know that it hated me before you. 19 If you were a part of the world, the world loved its own. But because you are not a part of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world, for this [reason] the world hates you. 20 Recall the word that I spoke to you: A slave is not greater than his lord. If they persecuted me, you too they will persecute. If they have abided by my word, they will abide by yours also. 21 But they will do all these things to you because of my name, since they do not know [the one] who sent me. 22 If I did [or, had] not come and talked to them, they did [/would] not have [any] sin; but now they do not have [any] reason to give concerning their sin. 23 [He] who hates me hates also my Father. 24 If I had not done among them the deeds that nobody else has done, they did not have [any] sin; but now they have seen and they have looked at me and my Father alike.  25 But it happens in order to fulfill the word written in their Law:  They hated me without reason. 26 When the Helper shall come whom I will send you from the Father, the Spirit of Truth, who comes forth from the Father, he will witness about me; 27 you as well will witness, because you have been with me from the beginning.” 

RANTA 16 
”Nati sine equétien lenna i lá nauvalde tyárine lanta. 2 Queni le-hehtuvar et i *yomencoallo. É i lúme túla yasse ilquen le-nahtala savuva i sie *veuyas Eru. 3 Mal caruvalte nati sine pan ualte ista i Atar hya ní véla. 4 Ono nati sine equétien lenna in enyaluvalde i nyarnen len pa tai íre lúmelta tule. 5 Nati sine uan quente lenna i yestallo, pan engen aselde. 5 Mal sí autan yenna ni-mentane, ananta úner mici le maquete ninna: Manna autal? 6 Mal pan equétien nati sine, naire aquantie endalta. 7 Mal nyáran len i nanwie: Ná len aşea i autan. An qui uan auta, i Şámo laume tuluva lenna, mal qui autan, mentauvanyes lenna. 8 Ar íre isse tuluva tyaruvas i mar save, pa úcare ar pa failie ar pa namie: 9 pa úcare, pan ualte save nisse, 10 pa failie, pan autan i Atarenna ar ualde cenuva ni ambe, 11 pa namie, pan mar sino turco anaie námina.
	12 En samin rimbe natali quetien lenna, mal ualde pole colitat sí. 13 Ono íre isse tuluva, i Faire nanwiéva, tulyauvas le mir i quanda nanwie, an uas quetuva et immollo, mal yar hlaris quetuvas, ar caruvas sinwe len yar tuluvar. 14 Isse taluva nin alcar, pan camuvas et ninyallon ar caruvas tai sinwe len. 15 Ilye i nati yar i Atar same ninye nar. Tanen quenten i camis et ninyallon ar care tai sinwe len. 16 Apa şinta lúme ualde cenuva ni ambe, ar apa an şinta lúme encenuvalden.” 

CHAPTER 16
“These things I have spoken to you that you will not be made to fall. 2 People will exclude you from the synagogue. Indeed the hour is coming when everyone killing you will believe that so he serves God. 3 But they will do these things since they do not know the Father or me alike. 4 But these things I have spoken to you that you will recall that I told you about them when their time comes. These things I did not say to you from the beginning, since I was with you. 5 But now I go away to [him] who sent me, and yet no man among you says to me: Where do you go away to? 6 But since I have spoken these things, grief has filled your heart. 7 But I am telling you the truth: It is beneficial for you that I am going away. For if I do not go away, the Helper will by no means come to you, but if I go away, I will send him to you. 8 For when he shall come, he will make the world believe, concerning sin and concerning righteousness and concerning judgement: 9 concerning sin, since they do not believe in me; 10 concerning righteousness, since I am going away to the Father and they will not see me [any]more, 11 concerning judgement, because the ruler of this world has been judged.
	12 I still have many things to say to you, but you cannot bear them now. 13 But when he shall come, the Spirit of truth, he shall lead you into the whole truth, for he shall not speak out of [him]self, but [the things] that he hears he will speak, and he will make known to you [the things] that will come. 14 He will bring me glory, since he will receive out of my [things] and will make them known to you. 15 All the things that the Father has are mine. Because of that I said that he receives out of my [things] and makes them known to you. 16 After a short time you will not see me [any]more, and after another short time you will see me again.”

	17 Etta ennoli hildoryaron quenter, quén i exenna: “Mana tea si ya quetis venna: Apa şinta lúme ualde cenuva ni ambe, ar apa an şinta lúme encenuvalden, ar: Pan autan i Atarenna – ?” 18 Sie quentelte: “Mana tea si ya quetis: şinta lúme? Ualve hanya ya quétas.” 19 Yésus sinte i mernelte ceşitas, ar quentes téna: “Ma céşalde mici inde pa si, pan quenten: Apa şinta lúme ualde cenuva ni, ar apa an şinta lúme encenuvalden – ? 20 Násie, násie quetin lenna: Samuvalde nier ar nauvalde yaimie, mal i mar nauva valima; ono nairelda nauva vistana mir alasse. 21 Nís, íre cólas lapse, same naire, pan lúmerya utúlie; mal íre ocólies i hína, uas ambe enyale şangierya, alasseryanen in atan anaie nóna mir i mar. 22 Sie yú elde samir naire sí. Mal cenuvan le ata, ar endalda samuva alasse, ar *úquen mapuva alasselda lello. 23 Ar aure entasse ualde maquetuva ninna pa erya nat. Násie, násie quetin lenna: Ilqua ya arcalde i Atarello essenyanen antauvas len. 24 Tenna sí ualde ararcie erya nat essenyanen. Á arca ar camuvalde, i alasselda nauva quanta.
	25 Nati sine equétien lenna sestiessen. Lúme túla yasse uan ambe quetuva len sestiessen, mal pantave nyaruvan len pa i Atar. 26 Lúme entasse ualde arcuva erya nat essenyanen, ar uan quete len in inye arcuva i Atarello pa le. 27 An i Atar immo mele le, pan elde emélier ní ar asávier in inye ettúle Erullo. 28 Etutúlien i Atarello ar utúlie mir i mar. Ente, autan i mardello ar mene i Atarenna. 
	29 Hildoryar quenter: “Yé! Sí quétal pantave, ar ual quete sestie! 30 Sí istalme in istal ilye nati ar ual same maure in aiquen ceşuva lye. Sinen istalme in ettúlel Erullo.” 31 Yésus hanquente téna: “Sí savilde? 32 Yé! I lúme túla, é utúlies, yasse nauvalde vintane ilquen véra coaryanna, ar ní hehtuvalde erinqua, ananta uan erinqua, pan i Atar ea óni. 33 Equétien nati sine lenna, in inyenen samuvalde raine. Mar sinasse samilde şangie, mal sama verie! Inye utúruye i mar.”

	17 Therefore some of his disciples said, one to the other: “What does this mean that he said to us: After a short time you will not see me [any]more, and after another short time you shall see me again, and: Because I go away to the Father – ?” 18 Thus they said: “What does this mean that he says: a short time? We do not understand what he is saying.” 19 Jesus knew that they wanted to inquire of him, and he said to them: “Are you inquiring among yourselves about this, because I said: After a short time you will not see me, and after another short time you will see me again – ? 20 Truly, truly I say to you: You will have tears and you will be wailing, but the world will be happy; but your grief will be changed into joy.  21 A woman, when she is bearing a baby, has grief, because her time has come; but when she has borne the child, she does not [any]more recall her tribulation, because of her joy that a man has been born into the world.  22 So you too have grief now. But I will see you again, and your heart shall have joy, and nobody will take your joy [away] from you. 23 For in that day you will not ask me about a single thing. Truly, truly I say to you: Everything that you pray for from the Father in my name he will give to you. 24 Until now you have not prayed for a single thing in my name. Pray and you shall receive, that your joy will be full. 
	25 These things I have spoken to you in comparisions. An hour is coming when I will no more speak to you in comparisons, but openly I will tell you about the Father. 26 In that time you will not ask a single thing in my name, and I do not say to you that I will ask [anything] of the Father concerning you [, either]. 27 For the Father himself loves you, because you have loved me and have believed that I came forth from God. 28 I have come forth from the Father and have come into the world. Furthermore, I go away from the world and go to the Father.
	29 His disciples said: “Look! Now you are speaking openly, and you do not speak [any] comparison! 30 Now we know that you know all things and you do not have need that anyone inquires of you. By this we know that you came forth from God.” 31 Jesus answered them: “Now you believe? 32 Look! The hour is coming, indeed it has come, when you shall be scattered everyone to his own house, and me you will leave [hehta- “forsake”] alone, and yet I am not alone, since the Father is with me. 33 I have spoken these things to you, that by me you will have peace. In this world you have tribulation, but have courage! I have conquered the world.” 

RANTA 17 
Yésus quente nati sine, ar ortala henduryat menelenna eques: “Atar, i lúme utúlie; á tala alcar Yondotyan, i Yondotya taluva alcar tyén, 2 pan ánietye sen hére or ilya hráve, i antauvas oira coivie illin i ánietye sen. 3 Si oira coivie ná, in istalte tyé, i erya nanwa Aino, ar ye mentanetye, Yésus Hristo. 4 Tyen atálien alcar cemende, telyala i molie ya ánietye nin carien. 5 Ar sí, Atar, áni care alarinqua ara tyé i alcarnen ya sámen ara tyé nó i mar enge!
	6 Ápantien essetya i atanin i antanetye nin et i mardello. Anelte vératyar, ar antanetyet inyen, ar ihímielte quettatya. 7 Sí istalte in ilye nati yar antanetye nin nar tyello, 8 an i quetier yar antanetye nin ánien tien, ar acámieltet ar é istalte i tyé mentane ni. 9 Arcan pa te. Uan arca pa i mar, mal pa i ánietye nin, pan nalte vératyar, 10 ar ilye natinyar nar vératyar ar vératyar nar ninye, ar anaien carna alcarinqua mici te.
	11 Ente, uan ea ambe i mardesse, mal té ear i mardesse, ar inye túla tyenna. Aire Atar, áte varya véra essetyan ya ánietye nin, i nauvalte er, ve vet. 12 Íre engen aselte varyanenyet véra essetyan, ar ehépienyet, ar úner mici te nancarna ná hequa ye nancaruvaina né, *amaquatien i tehtele. 13 Mal sí túlan tyenna, ar quetin nati sine i mardesse i samuvalte quanta alassenya intesse. 14 Ánien quettatya tien, mal i mar etévie te, pan ualte ranta i mardo, ve inye ua ranta i mardo.

CHAPTER 17
Jesus said these things, and raising his eyes to heaven he said: “Father, the hour has come; bring glory to your Son, that your Son will bring glory to you, 2 since you have given him lordship over all flesh, that he will give eternal life to all that you have given him. 3 This is eternal life, that they know you, the sole true God, and [the one] whom you sent, Jesus Christ. 4 I have brought you glory on earth, completing the work that you have given me to do. 5 And now, Father, make me glorious beside you with the glory that I had beside you before the world existed!
	6 I have revealed your name to the men that you gave me out of the world. They were your own, and you gave them to me, and they have abided by your word. 7 Now they know that all things that you gave me are from you, 8 for the sayings that you gave me I have given to them, and they have received them and indeed they know that you sent me. 9 I make petition concerning them. I do not make petition concerning the world, but about [the ones] that you have given me, since they are yours, 10 and all my things are your own and your own ones are mine, and I have been made glorious among them.
	11 Furthermore, I am not [any]more in the world, but they are in the world, and I am coming to you. Holy Father, protect them for [the sake of] your own name that you have given me, that they will be one, like us. 12 When I was with them I protected them for [the sake of] your own name, and I have kept them, and no man among them is destroyed except [he] who was going to be destroyed, to fulfill the scripture. 13 But now I am coming to you, and I say these things in the world that they will have full joy in themselves. 14 I have given your word to them, but the world has hated them, since they are not a part of the world, as I am not a part of the world.

	15 Arcan tyello, lá i mapatyet et i mardello, mal i varyatyet ulcullo. 16 Ualte ranta i mardo, ve inye ua ranta i mardo. 17 Áte airita i nanwiénen; quettatya nanwie ná. 18 Ve mentanetye ní mir i mar, yú inye mentane té mir i mar. 19 Ar airitan imne tien, i nauvalte airinte i nanwiénen. 
	20 Arcan, lá pa té erinque, mal yú pa i savir nisse quettaltanen, 21 i nauvalte illi er, síve tyé, Atar, ea nisse ar inye tyesse, i yú té euvar vetse, in i mar savuva i tyé mentane ni. 22 Ente, i alcar ya ánietye nin ánien tien, i nauvalte er, síve vét er nát, 23 ní tesse ar tyé nisse, i nauvalte cárine ilvane mir er, in i mar istuva i tyé mentane ni ar i méletyet, ve méletye ní. 24 Atar, merin i yasse inye ea, yú i ánietye nin euvar asinye, i cenuvalte alcarinya ya ánietye nin, pan méletye ni nó i mar tulcana né. 25 Faila Atar, i mar ua ista tye, mal inye ista tye, ar queni sine istar i tyé mentane ni. 26 Ar acárien essetya sinwa tien ar caruvanyes sinwa ata, in euva tesse i melme yanen méletye ní, ar inye tesse. 

	15 I ask [pray, petition] of you, not that you take them out of the world, but that you protect them from evil. 16 They are not a part of the world, as I am not a part of the world. 17 Sanctify them with truth; your word is truth. 18 As you sent me into the world, I too sent them into the world. 19 And I sanctify myself for them, that they will be sanctified with the truth.
	20 I pray, not concerning them alone, but also concerning those who believe in me by their word, 21 that they will all be one, as you, Father, is in me and I in you, that also they will be in us [vetse, dual locative], [so] that the world will believe that you sent me. 22 Therefore, the glory that you have given me I have given them, that they will be one, as we are [vet nát, dual] one, 23 I in them and you in me, that they will be made perfect into one, that the world will know that you sent me and that you loved them, as you loved me. 24 Father, I wish that where I am, also [the ones] that you have given me will be with me, that they will see my glory that you have given me, because you loved be before the world was established. 25 Just Father, the world does not know you, but I know you, and these people know that you sent me. 26 And I have made your name known to them and I will make it known again, [so] that the love with which you loved me will be in them, and I in them.

RANTA 18 
Apa quetie nati sine, Yésus etemenne as hildoryar olla i nelle estaina Cirron, nómenna yasse enge tarwa, ar isse ar hildoryar mittaner sa. 2 Mal yú Yúras, ye *vartane se, sinte i nóme, pan Yésus rimbe lúlissen velde as hildoryar tasse. 3 Etta Yúras nampe i ohtarhosta ar cánoli i hére *airimoron ar Farisaron ar túle tanna, talala *narrundor ar calmar ar carmar. 4 Sie Yésus, istala ilye i nati tuluvaila senna, lende ompa ar quente téna: “Mana cestalde?” 5 Hanquentelte: “Yésus Nasaretello.” Eques téna: “Inye sé.” Yú Yúras, ye *vartane se, tarne mici te.
	6 Mal íre quentes téna: “Inye sé,” tarnelte nan ar lantaner i talamenna. 7 Etta hanquentes téna ata: “Man cestalde?” Quentelte: “Yésus Nasaretello.” 8 Yésus hanquente: “Equétien lenna in inye ná sé. Etta, qui ní cestalde, lava tien auta” 9 – *amaquatien i quetta ya quentes: “Imíca i antanetye inyen úner ná nin vanwa.” 
	10 Tá Simon Péter, ye sáme macil, tunce sa ar pente i héra *airimo núro ar aucirne forya hlarya. I núro esse Malcus né. 11 Mal Yésus quente Péterenna: “Á panya macilelya i vainesse! I yulma ya i Atar ánie nin, lau sucuvanyes?”
	12 Tá i ohtarhosta ar i *tuxantur ar i cánor i Yúraron namper Yésus ar nunter se. 13 Tulyaneltes minyave ana Annas, an sé náne i atar veriryo Caiafas, ye náne i héra *airimo loa yanasse.  14 Caiafas né ye quente i Yúrannar i náne tien aşea i erya atan qualle rá i lien.

CHAPTER 18
After saying these things, Jesus went out with his disciples across the brook called Kidron, to a place where [there] was a garden, and he and his disciples entered it. 2 But also Judas, who betrayed him, knew the place, since Jesus at numerous times met with with his disciples there. 3 Therefore Judas took the soldier host and officers of the chief priests and Pharisees and came there, bringing torches and lamps and weapons. 4 Thus Jesus, knowing all the things going to come upon him, went forward and said to them: “What do you seek?” 5 They said: “Jesus from Nazareth.” He said to them: “I [am] he.” Also Judas, who betrayed him, stood among them.
	6 But when he said to them: “I [am] he,” they stood back and fell to the ground. 7 Therefore he answered them again: “Whom do you seek?” They said: “Jesus from Nazareth.” 8 Jesus answered: “I have said to you that I am he. Therefore, if [it is] me you seek, let them go away” 9 – in order to fulfill the word that he said: “Among [the ones] that you gave to me no man is lost to me.”
	10 Then Simon Peter, who had a sword, drew it and struck the servant of the chief priest and cut off his right ear. The servant’s name was Malchus. 11 But Jesus said to Peter: “Put your sword in the sheath! The cup that the Father has given me, am I really not to drink it?”
	12 Then the soldier host and the centurion and the officers of the Jews took Jesus and bound him. 13 They brought him first to Annas, for he was the father of the wife of Caiaphas, who was the chief priest in that year. 14 Caiaphas was [the one] who said to the Jews that it was beneficial for them that one man died on behalf of the people.

	15 Mal Símon Péter ar hyana hildo hilyanet Yésus. Sana hildo náne sinwa i héra *airimon ar túle as Yésus mir i paca i héra *airimóva, 16 mal Péter lemne i ettesse ara i ando. Etta i hyana hildo, ye náne sinwa i héra *airimon, ettúle ar carampe yenna tirne i ando ar tulyane Péter minna. 17 Tá i vende ye tirne i ando quente: “Ma ua yú elye i hildoron sana atano?” Isse hanquente: “Uan.”   
18 I núror ar i cánor náner cáriela *hyulmaruine, an ringa né, ar tarnelte *lautala inte. Yú Péter tarne aselte *lautala inse.
19 Tá i héra *airimo maquente Yésunna pa hildoryar ar pa peantáverya. 20 Yésus hanquente senna: “Acarpien i mardenna pantave. Illume peantanen *yomencoasse ar i cordasse, yasse ilye Yúrar tulir uo, ar quenten munta nuldiesse. 21 Mana i casta yanen ní céşal? Ceşa i hlasser ya quenten téna. Yé! Té istar ya quenten.” 22 Apa quentes nati sine, quén i cánoron i tarner ara se palpane Yésus i cendelesse ar eque: “Ma hanquétal i héra *airimonna sie?” 23 Yésus hanquente senna: “Qui quetin ya raica ná, á *vetta pa i raicie, mal qui quenten ya vanima ná , mana castalya palpien ni?” 24 Tá Annas se-mentane nútina Caiafas i héra *airimonna. 
	25 Sí Símon Péter tarne *lautala inse. Tá quentelte senna: “Ma ua yú elye mici hildoryar?” Sa-lalanes ar eques: “Uan.” 26 Imíca i móli i héra *airimo enge quén i onosso i nero yeo hlas Péter aucirne, ar eques: “Ma uan cenne lyé i tarwasse óse?” 27 Mal Péter lalane sa ata, ar mí imya lú tocot lamyane.

	15 But Simon Peter and another disciple followed Jesus. That disciple was known to the chief priest and came with Jesus into the courtyard of the chief priest, 16 but Peter remained on the outside by the gate. Therefore the other disciple, who was known to the chief priest, came out and spoke to [the one] who watched the gate and led Peter inside. 17 Then the maid who watched the gate said: “Are not you too of the disiples of that man?” He answered: “I am not.”
	18 The disciples and the officers had made a coal fire, for [it] was cold, and they stood warming themselves. Also Peter stood with them warming himself.
	19 Then the chief priest asked Jesus about his disciples and about his teaching. 20 Jesus answered him: “I have spoken to the world openly. Always I taught in synagogue and in the temple, where all Jews come together, and I said nothing in secret. 21 For what reason are you inquiring of me? Inquire of [those] who heard what I said to them. Look! They know what I said.” 22 After he said these things, one of the officers that stood by him beat Jesus in the face and said: “Are you answering the chief priest so?” 23 Jesus answered him: “If I say what is bad, witness about the badness, but if I said what is right, what is your reason for beating me?” 24 Then Annas sent him bound to Caiaphas the chief priest.
	25 Now Simon Peter stood warming himself. Then he said to him: “Are not you too among his disciples?” He denied it and said: “I am not.” 26 Among the slaves of the chief priest [there] was one of the family of the man whose ear Peter cut off, and he said: “Did I not see you in the garden with him?” 27 But Peter denied it again, and in the same moment a cock crowed [lit. “sounded”, as in the Greek]. 

	28 Tá tulyanelte Yésus Caiafasello i túriondenna i nórecánova. Sí arinya né. Mal té uar mittane i túrion i nórecánova, lá olien úpoice, mal lertumnelte mate i *lahtiémat. 29 Tá Piláto ettúle téna ar quente: “Mana i ongwe ya quétalde nér sina acárie?” 30 Hanquentelte senna: “Au nér sina úne *ongwemo, ualme antane se olla lyenna.” 31 Tá eque téna Piláto: “Elde áse mapa ar áse name şanyeldanen.” I Yúrar quenter senna: “Ualme lerta nahta aiquen” 32 – *amaquatien i quetta ya Yésus quente tanáven i nostale qualmeo ya qualumnes. 
	33 Etta Piláto lende mir i túrion i *nórecánova ar yalde Yésus ar quente senna: “Ma elye ná i aran Yúraron?” 34 Yésus hanquente: “Ma quetil si imlenen, hya ma exeli acarpier lyenna pa ní?” 35 Piláto hanquente: “Lau inye Yúra ná? Véra liendelya ar i hére *airimor antaner lye olla inyen. Mana acáriel?” 36 Yésus hanquente: “Aranienya ua mar sino. Au aranienya né mar sino, núronyar mahtaner, in inye lá nauva antana olla i Yúrain. Mal sí aranienya ua silo.” 
	37 Etta Piláto quente senna: “Sie nalye aran?” Yésus hanquente: “Elye quéta i nanye aran. Nat sinan anaien nóna, ar nat sinan utúlien mir i mar, i *vettuvan pa i nanwie. Ilquen ye ná i nanwiéno lasta ómanya.” 38 Eque senna Piláto: “Mana nanwie?”
	Quétiela si etemennes ata i Yúrannar ar quente téna: “Uan hire cáma sesse. 39 Mal samilde haime i senin len nér i Lahtiesse. Ma merilde, tá, i senuvan len i aran Yúraron?” 40 Tá yámelte ata, quetila: “Lá nér sina, mal Varavas!” Ono Varavas náne pilu.

	28 Then they led Jesus from Caiaphas to the palace of the governor. Now [it] was early. But they did not enter the palace of the governor, in order not to become unclean, but they might eat the pascal meal. Then Pilate came outside to them and said: “What is the crime that you are saying this man has committed?” 30 They answered him: “If this man was not a criminal, we did not turn him over to you.” 31 Then Pilate said to them: “You take him and judge him by your law.” The Jews said to him: “We may not kill anyone” 32 – in order to fulfill the word that Jesus spoke to indicate the kind of death that he was to die.
	33 Therefore Pilate went into the palace of the governor and called Jesus and said to him: “Are you the king of [the] Jews?” 34 Jesus answered: “Do you say this by yourself, or have others talked to you about me?” 35 Pilate answered: “Surely I am not a Jew? Your own nation and the chief priests gave you over to me. What have you done?” 36 Jesus answered: “My kingdom is not of this world. If my kingdom was of this world, my servants would have fought, that I would [Q: will] not be given over to the Jews. But now my kingdom is not from here.”
	37 Therefore Pilate said to him: “Thus you are a king?” Jesus answered: “You yourself are saying that I am a king. For this thing I have been born, and for this thing I have come into the world, that I am to witness about the truth. Everyone who is of the truth listens to my voice.” 38 Pilate said to him: “What is truth?”
	After saying this he went out again to the Jews and said to them: “I do not find [any] guilt in him. 39 But you have a custom that I release to you a man at the Passover. Do you wish, then, that I release to you the king of [the] Jews?” 40 Then they cried again, saying: “Not this man, but Barabbas!” But Barabbas was a robber. 

RANTA 19
Tá Piláto etta nampe Yésus ar rípe se. 2 Ar i ohtari carner ríe neceliva ar sa-panyaner caryasse ar hanter helinwa larma *os se, 3 ar túlelte epe se ar quenter: “Aiya, Aran Yúraron!” Ar palpaneltes i cendelesse. 4 Ar Piláto etelende ata ar quente téna: “Cena! Talanyes ettenna lenna ata, in istuvalde in uan hire cáma sesse.” 5 Etta Yésus ettúle, colila i ríe neceliva ar i helinwa larma. Ar quentes téna: “Ela i atan!” 6 Mal íre i hére airimor ar i cánor cenner se, yámelte quetila: “Áse tarwesta! Áse tarwesta!” Piláto quente téna: “Elde áse mapa ar áse tarwesta, an inye ua hire cáma sesse.” 7 I Yúrar hanquenter senna: “Samilme şanye, ar sana şanyenen náse valda qualmeo, pan acárien inse Eruo yondo.”  
8 Etta, íre Piláto hlasse quetie sina, anes ambe ruhtana, 9 ar lendes mir i túrion ata ar eque Yésunna: “Mallo tulilye?” Mal Yésus ua antane sen hanquenta. 10 Etta Piláto quente senna: “Ma ual carpa ninna? Ma ual ista in inye same hére lye-senien ar hére lye-tarwestien?” 11 Yésus hanquente senna: “Laume sámel hére or ní qui únes antana lyen táriello. Sinen i nér ye antane ni olla lyen same ambe túra úcare.” 

CHAPTER 19
Then Pilate therefore took Jesus and flogged him. 2 And the soldiers made a crown of some thorns and put it on his head and threw a violet raiment around him, 3 and they came before him and said: “Hail, King of [the] Jews.” And they beat him in the face. 4 And Pilate went out again and said to them: “Look! I am bringing him out to you again, that you can know that I do not find [any] guilt in him.” 5 Therefore Jesus came out, bearing the crown of thorns and the violet raiment. And he said to them: “Behold the man!” 6 But when the chief priests and the officers saw him, they cried [out] saying: “Crucify him! Crucify him!” Pilate said to them: “You take him and crucify him, for I do not find [any] guilt in him.” 7 The Jews answered him: “We have a law, and by that law he is worthy of death, since he has made [him]self God’s son.”
8 Therefore, when Pilate heard this saying, he was more frightened, 9 and he went into the palace again and said to Jesus: “Where do you come from?” But Jesus did not give him [any] answer. 10 Therefore Pilate said to him: “Do you not talk to me? Do you not know that I have authority to release you and authority to crucify you?” 11 Jesus answered him: “You had no authority at all over me if it was not given you from on high. Because of this the man who turned me over to you has greater [ambe túra = more great] sin.”

12 Etta Piláto cestane lé senien se. Mal i Yúrar yámer, quétala: “Qui senil nér sina, ualye meldo i Táraráno! Ilquen ye care inse aran amorta i Táraranna!” 13 Etta Piláto, hláriéla quettar sine, talle Yésus ettenna, ar hamunes to námohammarya nómesse estaina i Sarna Paca, hya Heveryasse Appaşa.  14 Sí enge i manwie i Lahtiéva; náne *os i nertea lúme. Ar quentes i Yúrannar: “Ela aranelda!” 15 Mal yámelte: “Áse mapa oa, áse mapa oa! Áse tarwesta!” Piláto quente téna: “Ma tarwestuvan aranelda?” I hére *airimor hanquenter: “Ualme same aran hequa i Táraran!” 16 Tá, etta, antanes Yésus olla tien tarwestien.
	Sie nampelte Yésus. 17 Colila tarwerya insen etemennes i nómenna estaina *Caraxomen, yó Heverya esse Olyoşa ná. 18 Tasse tarwestaneltes, ar exe atta óse, quén foryaryasse ar quén hyaryaryasse, as Yésus i endesse. 19 Piláto tence yú tanwa ar panyane sa i tarwesse. Náne técina: “Yésus Nasaretello, Aran Yúraron.” 20 Sie rimbali i Yúraron hentaner tanwa sina, pan i nóme yasse Yésus náne tarwestana caine har i ostonna, ar anes técina Heveryasse, Latinde ar Hellenyasse. 21 Mal i hére airimor Yúraron quenter Pilátonna: “Áva tece: Aran Yúraron, mal i quentes: Inye ná Aran Yúraron.” 22 Piláto hanquente: “Ya etécien etécien.” 

	12 Therefore Pilate sought a way of releasing him. But the Jews shouted, saying: “If you relase this man, you are not a friend of the High King [or, Emperor]! Anyone who makes [him]self a king rises up against the High King!” 13 Therefore Pilate, after hearing these things, brought Jesus outside, and he sat down on his judge[ment] seat in a place called the Stone Court, or in Hebrew Gabbatha. 14 Now [it] was the preparation of the Passover; [it] was around the night hour. And he said to the Jews: “Behold your king!” 15 But they cried: “Take him away, take him away! Crucify him!” Pilate said to them: “Am I to crucify your king?” The chief priests answered: “We do not have [any] king except the High King!” 16 Then, therefore, he gave Jesus over to them for crucifixion.
	So they took Jesus. 17 Carrying his cross for [him]self he went out to the place called Skull Place, the Hebrew name of which is Golgotha. 18 There they crucified him, and two others with him, one on his right and one on his left, with Jesus in the middle. 19 Pilate wrote also a sign and put it on the cross. [It] was written: “Jesus from Nazareth, King of [the] Jews.” 20 Thus many of the Jews read this sign, since the place where Jesus was crucified lay near to the city, and it was written in Hebrew, in Latin and in Greek. 21 But the chief priests of [the] Jews said to Pilate: “Do not write: King of [the] Jews, but that he said: I am King of [the] Jews.” 22 Pilate answered: “What I have written I have written.”

	23 I ohtari, íre tarwestanelte Yésus, namper larmaryar ar carner mittar canta, er mitta ilya ohtaren, ar nampelte yú lauperya. Mal i laupe náne pen yanwe, vérina ve erya mitta telmello talmanna. 24 Etta quentelte, quén i exenna: “Ávalve narca sa, mal alve hate *şanwar pa man samuva sa” – *amaquatien i tehtele ya quete: “Hyarnelte larmanyar mici inte, ar pa laupenya hantelte *şanwar.” Ar i ohtari é carner sie.
	25 Tarner ara Yésuo tarwe amillerya ar amilleryo néşa, María verirya Clópas, ar María Mahtaléne. 26 Sie, íre Yésus cenne amillerya ar i hildo ye méles tarila tasse, quentes amilleryanna: “Nís, ela yondotya!” 27 Tá quentes i hildonna: “Ela amillelya!” Ar sana lúmello i hildo nampe se mir véra coarya. 
	28 Epeta, íre Yésus cenne in ilqua telyana ná, quentes *amaquatien i tehtele: “Nanye soica.” 29 Enge tasse salpa quanta sára limpeo, ar panyanelte hwan ehtisse ar tulune sa antoryanna. 30 Apa camie i sára limpe, Yésus quente: “Nás telyana!”, ar láves caryan lanta ar effirne.

	23 The soldiers, when they crucified Jesus, took his raiments and made four pieces, one piece for each soldier, and they took also his tunic. But the tunic was without [any] seam [yanwe “joining”], woven as a single piece from top to bottom. 24 Therefore they said, one to the other: “Let us not rend it, but let us cast lots about who will have it” – in order to fulfill the scripture that says: “They parted my robes among themselves, and about my tunic they cast lots.” And the soldiers indeed did so.
	25 [There] stood beside Jesus’ cross his mother and his mother’s sister, Mary the mother of Clopas, and Mary Magdalene. 26 Thus, when Jesus saw his mother and the disciple that he loved standing there, he said to his mother: “Woman, behold your son!” 27 Then he said to the disciple: “Behold your mother!” And from that hour the disciple took her into his own house.
	 28 Thereafter, when Jesus saw that everything was [Q: is] completed, he said in order to fulfill the scripture: “I am thirsty.” 29 [There] was there a bowl full of sour wine, and they put a sponge on a spear and brought it to his mouth. 30 After receiving the sour wine, Jesus said: “It is completed!”, and he let his head drop and expired.

	31 Pan si martane i auresse Manwiéva, i Yúrar arcaner Pilálollo i telcoltat nauvat rácine ar i hroar mapane oa, i lá lemyumnelte i tarwesse i sendaresse, an sana sendare túra né. 32 Etta i ohtari túler ar rancer i telcu i minyo ar i exeo *yet nánet tarwestane óse. 33 Mal tulila Yésunna cennelte i náse qualina no¨vo, ar uar rance telcoryat. 34 Ananta quén i ohtarion *terne etterya ehtinen, ar mí imya lú serce ar nén ettúlet. 35 Ar ye sa-ecénie *evettie, ar *vettierya nanwa ná, ar isse ista i nyáras nanwali, i yú elde savuvar. 36 An nati sine martaner *amaquatien i tehtele: “Erya axo hroaryo lá nauva rácina.” 37 Ar ata, hyana tehtele quete: “Yétuvalte yenna *etérielte.”  
	38 Apa nati sine Yósef Arimaşeallo, ye náne Yésus hildo, mal nuldiesse ruciénen i Yúrallon, arcane Pilátollo mapáve oa Yésuo hroa, ar Piláto láve sa. Etta túles ar nampe hroarya oa. 39 Yú Nicorémus, i nér ye túle senna lómisse i yestasse, túle talala ostime níşima suhteva ar *şortoava, *os *lungwi tuxa. 40 Sie nampette Yésuo hroa ar vaitanet sa vaimassen as i níşime laiqui, ve Yúraron haime íre manwalte loico i sapsan. 41 Mal i nómesse yasse anes tarwestana enge tarwa, ar i tarwasse vinya noire, yasse *úquen en náne panyana. 42 Etta panyanette Yésuo hroa sanome, pan ta náne Yúraron aure Manwiéno, ar pan i noire hare né.

	31 Since this happened on the day of Preparation, the Jews requested from Pilate that their legs were to be [Q: will be] broken and the bodies taken away, that they would not remain on the cross on the day of rest, for that day of rest was great. 32 Therefore the soldiers came and broke the legs of the first and the other who [*yet, dual] were crucified with him. 33 But coming to Jesus they saw that he was [Q: is] dead already and did not break his legs. 34 And yet one of the soldiers pierced his side with a spear, and in the same moment blood and water came out. 35 And [he] who has seen it has witnessed, and his witness is true, and he knows that he is telling true things, that also you will believe. 36 For these things happened to fulfull the scripture: “A single bone of his body will not be broken.” 37 And again, a different scripture says: “They will look at [him] whom they have pierced.”
	38 After these things Joseph from Arimathea, who was a disciple of Jesus, but in secred for fear of the Jews, made request from Pilate to take away Jesus’ body, and Pilate allowed it. Therefore he came and took his body away. 39 Also Nicodemus, the man who came to him at night in the beginning, came bringing a blend of fragrant resin and eaglewood [a.k.a. aloe], around a hundred pounds. 40 Thus they [-tte, dual] took Jesus’ body and wrapped it in wraps with the fragrant herbs, according to [the] Jews’ custom when they prepare a corpse for the grave. 41 But in the place where he was crucified [there] was a garden, and in the garden a new tomb, in which nobody was yet put [/where nobody had yet been put]. 42 Therefore they put Jesus’ body there, since that was [the] Jews’ day of Preparation, and since the tomb was near.

RANTA 20
I minya auresse i otsolo María Mahtaléne túle i noirinna arinyave, íre en enge mornie, ar cennes in i ondo mapana oa i noirillo ná. 3 Etta nornes ar túle Símon Péterenna ar i hyana hildonna, ye Yésus méle, ar quente túna: “Amápielte i Heru et i noirillo, ar ualme ista yasse apánieltes.” 3 Tá Péter etemenne as i hyana hildo, ar lendette i noirinna. 4 Yúyo nér nornet, mal i hyana hildo norne linta lá Péter ar túle minya i noirinna, 5 ar cúves ar cenne i lanni caitala tasse, mal uas mittane. 6 Tá Símon Péter túle, hilyala se, ar mittanes i noire. Cennes i vaimar caitala tasse, 7 ar i lanne ya enge caryasse, lá caitala as i vaimar, mal tolúna satya nómesse. 8 Tá i hyana hildo, ye túle minya i noirinna, yú mittane; ar cennes ar sáves. 9 An en uatte sinte i tehtele, i mauyane sen orta qualinallon. 10 Tá i hildor nanwenner marittannar. 

CHAPTER 20
On the first day of the week Mary Magdalene came to the tomb early, when [it] was still dark, and she saw that the rock was [Q; is] taken away from the tomb. 3 Therefore she ran and came to Simon Peter and the other disciple, whom Jesus loved, and said to them: “They have taken the Lord out of the tomb, and we do not know where they have put him.” 3 Then Peter went forth with the other disciple, and they [-tte, dual] went to the tomb. 4 Both men ran, but the other other disciple ran faster than Peter and came first to the tomb, 5 and he bent and saw the clothes lying there, but he did not enter. 6 Then Simon Peter came, following him, and he entered the tomb. He saw the wraps lying there, 7 and the cloth that was on his head, not lying with the wraps, but rolled up in a separate place. 8 Then the other disciple, who came first to the tomb, also entered; and he saw and he believed. 9 For still they did not know the scripture, that [it] was necessary for him to rise from [the] dead. 10 Then the disciples returned to their [-tta, dual] homes.

	11 Mal María tarne niessen ara i noire. Ar lan nieryar uller cúves yétien mir i noire, 12 ar cennes vala atta mi ninque háma, quén ara i cas ar quén ara i talu yasse Yésuo hroa náne caitienwa. 13 Quentette senna: “Nís, mana i casta nyenyelyan?” Quentes túna: “Amápielte oa Herunya, ar uan ista yasse apánieltes.” 14 Quetila si quernes inse ar cenne Yésus tarila tasse, mal uas sinte i hé Yésus ná. 15 Yésus quente senna: “Nís, mana i casta nyenyelyan? Man cestal?” Intyala i hé i *tarwandur ná, quentes henna: “Heru, qui elye se-ocólie oa, nyara nin i nóme yasse apánielyes, ar inye se-mapuva oa.” 16 Yésus quente senna: “María!” Querila inse, quentes henna Heveryasse: “Rappóni!” – ya tea *peantar. 17 Yésus quente senna: “Ávani appa, an en uan orortie ama Atarinyanna. Mal mena hánonyannar ar queta téna: Ortan Atarinyanna ar Atareldanna, Ainonyanna ar Ainoldanna.” 18 María Mahtaléne túle ar talle i vinyar i hildonnar: “Ecénien i Heru!”, ar i quentes nati sine senna.

11 But Mary stood in tears by the tomb. And while her tears poured she bent to look into the tomb, 12 and she saw two angels in white sit [there], one by the head and one by the feet where Jesus’ body had been lying. 13 They [-tte, dual] said to her: “Woman, what is the reason for your tears?” She said to them: “They have taken away my Lord, and I do not know where they have put him.” 14 Saying this, she turned and saw Jesus standing there, but she did not know that he was [Q: is] Jesus. 15 Jesus said to her: “Woman, what is the reason for your weeping? Whom do you seek?” Supposing that he was the gardener, she said to him: “Lord, if you have carried him away, tell me the place where you have put him, and I will take him away.” 16 Jesus said to her: “Mary!” Turning, she said to him in Hebrew: “Rabboni” – which means teacher. 17 Jesus said to her: “Do not touch me, for I have not yet risen up to my Father. But go to my brothers and say to them: I ascend to my Father and your Father, my God and your God.” Mary Magdalene came and brought the news to the disciples: “I have seen the Lord!”, and that he said these things to her. 

	19 I şinyesse aure yano, i minya ré i otsolo, íre i fennar náner pahte yasse i hilmor enger, ruciénen i Yúrallon, Yésus túle ar tarne mici te ar quente téna: “Raine na len!” 20 Apa quetie si tannes tien máryat ar etserya. Tá i hildor náner valime íre cennelte i Heru. 21 Yésus enquente téna: “Raine na len! Tambe i Atar ementaye ní, síve inye menta lé.” 22 Ar apa quetie si şúyanes téna ar quente téna: “Cama i Aire Fea! 23 Qui apsenilde quenion úcari, nalte apsénine tien; qui tulcalde quenion úcari, nalte tulcane.”
	24 Mal Tomas, quén i yunqueo, estaina i Onóno, úne aselte íre Yésus túle. 25 Sie i hyane hildor quenter senna: “Ecénielme i Heru!” Mal quentes téna: “Qui uan cenuva máryatse i tehtar i taxion, ar uan panya ninya má etseryasse, lá savuvan.” 
	26 Auri tolto apa si hildoryar enger ata i coasse, ar Tomas enge aselte. I fennar náner pahte, mal Yésus túle téna ar quente: “Raine na len!” 27 Tá quentes Tomanna: “Á panya leperelya sís, ar cena mányat, ar á menta málya, ar ása panya etsenyasse; áva na pen savie, mal savila.” 28 Tomas hanquente senna: “Herunya ar Ainonya!” 29 Yésus quente senna: “Ma savil ceniénen ni? Valime nar i uar ecénie ananta savir.”
	30 Yésus carne yú rimbe hyane tannali epe i hildor, yar uar técine parma sinasse; 31 mal sine nar técine i savuvalde i Yésus ná i Hristo, i Eruion, ar i sávala samuvalde coivie esseryanen.

	19 On the evening of that day, the first day of the week, when the doors were closed where the disciples were, for fear of the Jews, Jesus came and stood among them and said to them: “Peace be to you!” 20 After saying this she showed them his hands and his side. Then the disciples were happy when they saw the Lord. 21 Jesus repeated to them: “Peace be to you!  As the Father has sent me, so I send you.” 22 And after saying this he breathed on them and said to them: “Receive the Holy Spirit! 23 If you forgive peoples’ sins, they are forgiven them; if you retain [tulca- “establish”] peoples’ sins, they are retained.”
	24 But Thomas, one of the twelve, called the Twin, was not with them when Jesus came. 25 Thus the other disciples said to him: “We have seen the Lord!” But he said to them: “If I will not see in his hands the marks of the nails, and I do not put my hand in his side, I will not believe.”
	26 Eight days after this his disciples were again in the house, and Thomas was with them. The doors were closed, but Jesus came to them and said: “Peace be to you!” 27 Then he said to Thomas: “Put your finger here, and see my hands, and send your hand, and put it in my side; do not be without belief, but believing.” 28 Thomas answered him: “My Lord and my God!” 29 Jesus said to him: “Do you believe because of seeing me? Happy are those who have not seen and yet believe.”
	30 Jesus did also many other signs before the disciples, that are not written in this book; 31 but these are written that you will believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that believing you will have life by his name.

RANTA 21  
Apa nati sine Yésus apantane inse i hildoin ata ara Ear Tiverias; ar apantanes inse sie: 2 Enger uo Símon Péter ar Tomas, estaina i Onóno, ar Natanael Cánallo Alileo ar Severaio yondor ar exe atta hildoryaron. 3 Símon Péter quente téna: “Ménan raitien halar.” Quentelte senna: “Yú elme túlar aselye.” Etemennelte ar lender mir i lunte, mal ter lóme yana raitanelte munta. 
	4 Mal íre arin túle, Yésus tarne i fárasse, ono i hildor uar hanyane i náse Yésus. 5 Tá Yésus quente téna: “Hinyar, ma ualde same halar?” Hanquentelte senna: “Ualme.” 6 Quentes téna: “Hata i rembe i foryasse i lunteo ar hiruvalde halali!” Sie hanteltes, ar tá ualte polde tucitas ama i liyúmenen halaiva. 7 Etta i hildo ye Yésus méle quente Péterenna: “Náse i Heru!” Sie Símon Péter, hlarila i náse i Heru, nunte vaccorya *os oşwerya, an anes helda, ar hantexe mir i ear. 8 Mal i hyane hildor túler i luntenen – an únelte haire nórello, er *os rangar tuxa –tucila i rembe halaron.
	9 Mal íre *hótarnelte nórenna cennelte caitala tasse *hyulmaruine ar halali caitala sanna, ar massa. 10 Yésus quente téna: “Á tala halali ion raitanelde sí.” 11 Etta Símon Péter lende mir i lunte ar tunce i rembe nórenna, quanta hoe halaron, nelde *lepenquean ar tuxa. Mal ómu anelte ta rimbe, i rembe úne narcana. 12 Eque téna Yésus: “Tula, sama *arinwat!” Úner i hildoron veryane maquete senna: “Man elye?”, pan sintelte i náse i Heru. 13 Yésus túle ar nampe i massa ar antane sa tien, ar yú i halar. 14 Si náne i neldea lú yasse Yésus apantane inse i hildoin apa anes ortana qualinallon.

CHAPTER 21
After these things Jesus revealed himself to the disciples by the Sea [of] Tiberias; and he revealed himself thus: 2 [There] were together Simon Peter and Thomas, called the Twin, and Nathanael from Cana of Galilee and the sons of Zebedee and two other of his disciples. 3 Simon Peter said to them: “I am going to catch some fishes.” They said to him: “We too are coming with you.” They went out and went into the boat, but through[out] that night they caught nothing.
	4 But when morning came, Jesus stood on the shore, but the disciples did not understand that he was Jesus. 5 Then Jesus said to them: “My children, have you not got [any] fishes?” They said to him: “We have not.” 6 He said to them: “Throw the net at the right of the boat and you will find some fishes!” So they threw it, and then they could not draw it up for the multitude of fishes. 7 Therefore the disciple whom Jesus loved said to Peter: “He is the Lord!” Thus Simon Peter, hearing that he was the Lord, bound his jacket around his waist, for he was naked, and threw himself into the sea. 8 But the other disciples came in the boat – for they were not far from land, only around a hundred yards – drawing the net of fishes.
	9 But when they stood off onto land they saw a coal fire lie there and some fishes lying on it, and bread. 10 Jesus said to them: “Bring some fishes of those you caught now.” 11 Therefore Simon Peter went into the boat and drew the net ashore [nórenna, “to land”], full of a hundred and fifty-three huge fishes. But though they were that many, the net was not torn. 12 Jesus said to them: “Come, have breakfast!” No man of the disciples dared to ask him: “Who are you?”, since they knew that he was the Lord. 13 Jesus came and took the bread and gave it to them, and also the fishes. 14 This was the third time that Jesus revealed himself to the disiciples after he was raised from [the] dead.

	15 Íre anelte mátiéla i *arinwat Yésus quente Símon Péterenna: “Símon Yohánion, ma melil ní ambe lá té?” Eque senna Péter: “Ná, Heru, istalye i nalye melda nin.” Quentes senna: “Á anta matta eulenyain!” 16 Ata eques senna, attea lú: “Símon Péter, ma melilyen?” Quentes senna: “Ná, Heru, istal i nalye melda nin.” Eques senna: “Na mavar mámanyain!” 
	17 Quentes senna neldea lú: “Símon Yohánion, ma nanye melda lyen?” Péter sáme naire pan quentes senna i neldea lú: “Ma nanye melda lyen?” Sie eques senna: “Heru, elye ista ilqua; elye ista i nalye melda nin!” Yésus quente senna: “Á anta matso eulenyain. 18 Násie, násie quetin lyenna: Íre anel ambe nessa, nuntel i quilta *os imle ar vantane yasse mernel. Mal íre nauval yára, rahtuval mályanten ar exe lye-nutuva ar lye-tulyauva yanna ual mere.” 19 Si quentes tanáven i nostale qualmeo yanen talumnes alcar Erun. Ar apa quetie si quentes senna: “Áni hilya.” 
	20 Íre quernes inse, Péter cenne i hildo ye Yésus méle hilyala – i quén ye i *şinyematse náne talta ambostyanna ar quente: “Heru, man ná ye *varta lye?” 21 Etta, íre Péter cenne se, quentes Yésunna: “Heru, mana nér sina caruva?” 22 Eque senna Yésus: “Qui şelmanya ná i lemyuvas tenna tulin, mana ta lyen? Elye áni hilya!” 23 Etta quetie sina etemenne imíca i hildor: “Sana hildo ua qualuva.” Mal Yésus ua quente senna in uas qualuva, mal: “Qui şelmanya ná i lemyuvas tenna tulin, mana ta lyen?”
	24 Isse ná i hildo ye *vetta pa si ar ye etécie nati sine, ar istalme i *vettierya nanwa ná. 25 Mal ear yú rimbe hyane natali yar Yésus acárie. Qui mo tecumne pa ilya erya natto, intyan i lá ea fárea nóme mí mar imma i parmain nála técine.

	15 When they had eaten the breakfast Jesus said to Simon Peter: “Simon son of John, do you love me more than them?” Peter said to him: “Yes, Lord, you know that you are dear to me.” He said to him: “Give food to my lambs.” 16 Again he said to him, a second time: “Simon Peter, do you love me?” He said to him: “Yes, Lord, you know that you are dear to me.” He said to him: “Be a shepherd for my sheep!”
	17 He said to him a third time: “Simon son of John, am I dear to you?” Peter had grief because he said to him a third time: “Am I dear to you?” Thus he said to him: “Lord, you know everything; you know that you are dar to me!” Jesus said to him: “Give food to my lambs. 18 Truly, truly I say to you: When you were younger, you bound the belt about yourself and walked where you wished. But when you shall be old, you will reach [out] with your hands and another will bind you and lead you where you do not wish.” 19 This he said to show the kind of death by which he was going to bring glory to God. And after this he said to him: “Follow me.”
	20 When he turned [Q: turned himself], Peter saw the disciple whom Jesus loved follow – the person who at the evening meal was leaning towards his chest and said: “Lord, who is [the one] who betrays you?” 21 Therefore, when Peter saw him, he said to Jesus: “Lord, what will this man do?” 22 Jesus said to him: “If my will is that he will remain until I come, what is that to you? You follow me!” 23 Therefore this saying went out among the disciples: “That disciple will not die.” But Jesus did not say to him that he will not die, but: “If my will is that he will remain until I come, what is that to you?”
	24 He is the disciple who witnesses about this and who has written these things, and we know that his witness is true. 25 But [there] are also many other things that Jesus has done. If one were to write about every single matter, I suppose that there is not enough place [or, space] in the world itself for the books being written.
