Evandilyon Lúcasso
THE GOSPEL OF LUKE [, or LUCAS]
Partial revision of March 2022

RANTA 1 
Pan rimbali amápier mir má *partie nyarna pa i nati yar amartier mici me, 2 ve acámielmet illon minyave náner astarmor ar núror i quetto, 3 nemne mára yú inyen, har híliéla ilye nati i yestallo, tece tai ve lúmequenta elyen, alcarinqua Şeofílo, 4 istielyan i tanca talma i nation pa yar anaiel peantana.
	5 Mi réryar Herol, aran Yúreo, enge *airimo estaina Secaría, i hyariéno Avio, ar sámes veri Árono selyeron, ar esserya náne Elísavet. 6 Ar anette yúyo faile epe Eru, vantala ilye i axanissen ar şanyessen mi ilvana lé. 7 Mal lá enge hína asette, an Elísavet ua polde nosta, ar yúyo sámet rimbe loali. 

CHAPTER 1
Since numerous ones have taken into hand to compose an account about the things that have happened among us, 2 as we received them from [those] who first were witnesses and servants of the word, 3 it seemed good also to me, after closely following all things from the beginning, to write them as chronological account for you, glorious Theophilus, 4 for you to know the firm foundation of the things about which you have been instructed.
	5 In the days of Herod, king of Judea, [there] was a priest called Zechariah, of the division of Abiah, and he had a wife of the daughters of Aaron, and her name was Elizabeth. 6 And they were both righteous before God, walking in all the commandments and laws in a perfect manner. 7 But [there] was not [any] child with them, for Elizabeth could not conceive, and both had [an age of] many years.

	8 I lú túle *ciltieryanna, ar carnes i *airimo molie epe Eru. 9 Hatiénen *şanwar, ve i *airimoron lé náne, lantane senna mene mir i Héruo yána urtáven *nisque. 10 Ar i quanda rimbe i lieo táraner hyamila i ettesse i lúmesse urtáveo *nisque.
	11 Tá i Héruo vala tannexe sen, tarila foryasse i *yangwava *nisqueva. 12 Mal Secaría náne tarcina ceniénen se, ar caure lantane senna. 13 Mal i vala quente senna: “Áva ruce, Secaría, an arcandelya anaie hlárina, ar Elísavet verilya nauva amil yondon lyen, ar alye anta sen i esse Yoháno.  14 Ar samuval alasse ar márie, ar rimbali nauvar valime pan anaies nóna,

	8 The turn [lú: occasion] came to his division, and he did the priest's work before God. 9 By throwing lots, as the custom of the priests was, it fell upon him to go into God's santuary to burn incence.  10 And the entire multitude of the people were standing praying on the outside at the hour of burning incence. 
	11 Then the Lord's angel showed himself to him, standing at the right of the altar of incence. 12 But Zechariah was troubled at seeing him, and fear fell upon him. 13 But the angel said to him: “Do not fear, Zechariah, for your petition has been heard, and Elizabeth your wife will be mother to a son to you, and you are to give him the name John. 14 And you will have joy and happiness, and numerous ones will be happy since he has been born,

15 an nauvas túra epe i Héru, ar limpe ar polda yulda ávas suce, ar nauvas quátina Aire Feanen aqua et amilleryo mónallo. 16 Ar rimbali yondoron Israélo queruvas nan i Héru Ainoltanna, 17 ar isse menuva epe se mi Elío faire ar túre,  querien atarion endar nan hínannar ar i avari i tercenna failaron, panien epe i Héru manwana lie.”
	18 Ar Secaría quente i valanna: “Manen polin ista nat sina? An nanye yára, ar verinya same rimbe loali.” 19 Hanquentasse i vala quente senna: “Inye Avriel, ye tare epe Eru, ar anen etementana carpien aselye ar carien sinwe lyen i máre sinyar pa nati sine. 20 Mal yé! nauval quilda ar ua poluva quete tenna i aure yasse nati sine martuvar, pan ual sáve quettanyassen, yar nauvar cárine anwe lúmeltasse.”

15 for he will be great before the Lord, and wine and strong drink he is not to drink, and he will be filled with Holy Spirit all the way [aqua = wholly] from his mother's womb. 16 And numerous ones of the sons of Israel he will turn back to the Lord their God, 17 and he will go before him in Elijah's spirit and power, to turn back the hearts of fathers to children and the refusers to the insight of just ones, to put before the Lord a prepared people.”
	18 And Zechariah said to the angel: “How can I know this thing? For I am old, and my wife has [an age of] many years.” 19 In answer the angel said to him: “I [am] Gabriel, who stands before God, and I was sent forth to speak with you and to make known to you the good news about these things. 20 But behold! you will be silent and will not be able to speak until the day when these things will happen, since you did not believe in my words, which will be made real in their time.”

21 Ar i lie hópane Secarían, ar anelte elmendasse pan anes ta andave i yánasse. 22 Mal íre ettúles uas polde carpa téna, ar túnelte i cennes maur i yánasse, ar carnes hwermeli tien, en nála úpa. 23 Íre i auri *veuyaleryo náner telyane, oantes coaryanna.
	24 Mal apa auri sine Elísavet nostane, ar lanyanes inse exellon ter astari lempe, quetila: 25 “Sie i Héru acárie nin, mí auri yassen cimnes ni mapien oa nucumnienya mici atani.”
	26 I enquea astaresse i vala Avriel náne mentana Erullo ostonna Alileasse estaina Nasaret, 27 vendenna nauta veryangwen as neren estaina Yósef, Láviro nosseo, ar i vendeo esse náne María. 

21 And the people waited for Zechariah, and they were in wonder since he was so long in the sanctuary. 22 But when he came out he could not speak to them, and they perceived that he saw a vision in the sanctuary, and he made gestures to them, still being dumb. 23 When the days of his service were complete, he went away to his house.
	24 But after these days Elizabeth conceived, and she secluded herself from others for [ter = 'through'] six months, saying: “Thus the Lord has done to me, in the days in which he heeded me to take away my humiliation among men.”
	26 In the sixth month the angel Gabriel was sent from God to a city in Galilee called Nazareth, 27 to a maiden pledged for marriage with a man called Joseph, of the kin of David, and the maiden's name was Mary.

	28 Ar íre i vala mittane epe se, quentes: “Hara máriesse, elye ye acámie Eruanna; i Héru aselye.” 29 Mal Mária náne tarcina i quetiénen ar néve hanya mana nostale *suiliéva ta náne. 30 Ar i vala quente senna: “Áva ruce, María, an ihíriel lisse as Eru, 31 ar yé! nostuval mónalyasse ar coluva yondo, ar alye anta sen i esse Yésus. 32 Isse nauva túra ar nauva estaina i Antaro Yondo, ar i Héru Eru antauva sen Lávir ataryo mahalma, 32 ar turuvas Yácovo nosse tennoio, ar lá euva metta aranieryo.”
	34 Mal María quente i valanna: “Manen nat sina martuva, pan uan ista nér?” 35 Ar hanquentasse i vala quente senna: “Aire Fea tuluva lyenna, ar i Antaro nire teltuva lye; sie yú i aire nála nóna nauva estaina Eruo Yondo.

	28 And when the angel entered before her, he said: “Greetings, you who have received grace; the Lord [is] with you. 29 But Mary was troubled by the saying and tried to understand what kind of greeting that was. 30 And the angel said to her: “Do not be afraid, Mary, for you have found favor with God, 31 and behold! you will conceive in your womb and will bear a son, and you are to give him the name Jesus. 32 He will be great and will be called the Son of the Most High, for the Lord God will give him David his father's throne, 32 and he will rule over Jacob's house [nosse: kin] forever, and [there] will not be [any] end of his kingdom.”
	34 But Mary said to the angel: “How will this thing happen, since I do not know a man?” 35 And in answer the angel said to her: “Holy Spirit will come upon you, and the power of the Most High will overshadow you; thus also the holy [one] being born will be called God's Son.

36 Ar yé! Elísavet, ye ná nosselyo, inse onostie yondo yárieryasse, ar asta sina ná i enquea sen ye náne estaina *yávelóra. 37 An Erun ea munta úcárima.” 38 Tá María quente: “Ela i Héruo *núre! Nai martuva nin ve equétiel.” Ar i vala oante sello.
	39 Mal yane auressen María oronte ar lende hormenen ostonna Yúreasse, 40 ar mennes mir coarya Secaría ar *suilane Elísavet. 41 Íre Elísavet hlasse Marío *suilie, i lapse mónaryasse campe, ar Elísavet náne quátina Aire Feanen, 42 ar yámes taura ómanen ar quente: “Aistana elye imíca nissi, ar aistana i yáve mónalyo! 43 Ar manen ná i nat sina amartie nin, i Herunyo amil túla ninna? 44 An yé! íre *suilielyo lamma túle hlarunyanta, i lapse mónanyasse campe túra alassenen! 45 Valima isse ye sáve i nauvar cárine anwe i nati quétine senna lo i Héru!”

36 And behold! Elizabeth, who is of your kin, has herself conceived a son in her old age, and this month is the sixth for her who was called unfruitful. 37 For to God [there] is nothing impossible.” 38 Then Mary said: “Behold the servant-girl of the Lord! May it happen to me as you have said.” And the angel went away from her.
	39 But in those days Mary arose and went with urgency to a city in Judea, 40 and she went into the hpise of Zechariah and greeted Elizabeth. 41 When Elizabeth heard Mary's greeting, the babe in her womb jumped, and Elizabeth was filled with Holy Spirit, 42 and she cried with a great voice and said: “Blessed [are] you among women, and blessed [is] the fruit of your womb! 43 And how is [it] that this thing has happened to me, that my Lord's mother is coming to me?” 44 And behold! when the sound of your greeting came to my ears, the babe in my womb jumped with great joy! 45 Happy [is] she who believed that will be made true the things spoken to her by the Lord!”

46 Tá María quente: “Feanya laita i Héru, 47 ar fairenya ea mi alasse Eru *Rehtonyanen, 48 an ecénies *núreryo naldie. Ar yé! ho sí ilye *nónari estuvar ni valima, 49 an i Taura acárie túre cardali nin, ar aire ná esserya; 50 ar ter *nónaréli ar nónaréli oravierya ea issen melir se. 51 Acáries taure natali, ivinties i nar turquime endalto sanwessen. 52 Hantes undu taurali mahalmallon ar ortane naldali; 53 aquáties i maitar máre natalínen ar ementaye oa luste i sámer lar. 54 Amánies Israel núroryan, enyalien oravie, 55 ve nyarnes atarilvain, Avrahámen ar nosseryan, tennoio.” 56 Ar María lemne as Elísavet *os astar nelde. Tá nanwennes coaryanna.

46 Then Mary said: “My soul praises the Lord, 47 and my spirit is in joy by God my Savior, 48 for he has seen the lowly state of his maidservant. And behold! from now all generations will call me happy, 49 for the Mighty One has done great deeds to me, and holy is his name; 50 and through generations and generations his mercy is upon [those] that love him. 51 He has done mighty things,  he has scattered [those] that are haughty in the thoughts of their hearts. 52 He threw down mighty ones from thrones and raised up lowly ones; 53 he has filled the hungry ones with good things and has sent away empty [those] that had riches. 54 He has helped Israel his servant, to recall mercy,55 as he told to our fathers, to Abraham and to his kin, forever. 56 And Mary remained with Elizabeth around three months. Then she returned to her house.

	57 Elisavéten túle i lúme colien lapserya, ar coldes yondo. 58 Ar i armaror ar nosseryo queni hlasser i sen-antane i Héru túra oravie, ar anelte mi alasse óse. 59 Ar i toltea auresse túlelte *oscirien i hína, ar estumneltes ataryo essenen, Secaría. 60 Mal amillerya hanquente ar eque: “Vá, mal esserya nauva Yoháno.” 61 Tá quentelte senna: “Ea úner onosselyasse ye same sana esse.” 62 Tá cestanelte hanquenta i atarello hwermelínen, mana esse mernes i hínan. 63 Ar arcanes *palma ar tence: “Esserya ná Yoháno.” Ar illi mici te tatallaner.  

	57 For Elizabeth came the time for bearing her baby, and she bore a son. 58 And the neighbors and the people of her kin heard that the Lord gave her great mercy, and they were in joy with her. 59 And on the eight day they came to circumcise the child, and they were going to call it by his father's name, Zecharia. 60 But its mother answered and said: “No, but its name shall be John.” 61 Then they said to her: “[There] is no man in your family that has that name.” 62 Then they sought an answer from the father by gestures, what name he wanted for the child. 63 And he requested a tablet and wrote: “His name is John.” And all among them marveled.

64 Mí imya lú antorya náne pantana ar lamberya lehtana, ar quentes, aistala Eru. 65 Ar rucie lantane ilye armaroryannar, ar mí quanda ortoména Yúreasse mo caramper pa ilye nati sine, 65 ar illi i hlasser túner sa endaltasse, quetila: “É mana nauva hína sina?” An yú i Héruo má enge óse.
	67 Ar Secaría atarya náne quátina Aire Feanen ar quente ve Erutercáno, quetila: 68 “Na aistana i Héru, Israélo Aino, pan icímies ar etelehties lierya! 29 Ar ortanes ven rasse rehtiéva Lávir núroryo coasse, 70 ve equéties ter anto i airi tercánoryaron et i vanwiello, 71 pa rehtie ñottolvallon ar ho i má ion tevir ve, 72 tanáven oravie atarilvassen ar enyalien aire vérerya, 73 i vanda ya antanes Avraham atarelvan, 

At the same moment his mouth was opened and his tongue loosened, and he spoke, blessing God. 65 And fear fell upon all his neighbors, and in the whole mountain-region in Judea one talked about all these things, 65 and all that heard perceived it in their heart, saying: “What indeed will this child be?” For also the Lord's hand was with him.
	67 And Zecharia his father was filled with Holy Spirit and spoke as a prophet, saying: 68 “Blessed be the Lord, God of Israel, since he has heeded and has delivered his people! 29 And he raised for us a horn of salvation in David his servant's house, 70 as he has spoken through the mouth of his holy heralds from out of the past, 71 about salvation from our enemies and from the hand of [those] that hate us, 72 to show mercy on our fathers and to recall his holy covenant, 73 the oath that he gave to Abraham our father,

74 lavien ven náve núror sen apa anelve rehtane ho ñottolvaron má, 75 airesse ar failiesse epe se ilye aurelvassen. 76 Mal tyé, hína, nauva estaina Erutercáno i Antaro, an menuvatye epe i Heru manwien malleryar, 77 antáven istya rehtiéno lieryan apseniénen úcareltaiva, 78 Ainolvo *ofelmenen oraviéno, yanen anaróre et tarmenello tuluva venna, 79 antáven alcar in hámar morniesse ar ñuruhuinesse, tulyáven talulvat i tiesse raineva.”
	80 Ar i hína alle ar náne carna taura fairesse, ar enges i erumessen tenna i ré yasse tanumnes inse Israélen.

74 to allow us to be servants for him after we were saved from the hand of our enemies, 75 in holiness and justness before him in all our days. 76 But you, child, shall be called prophet of the Most High, for you will go before the Lord to prepare his ways, 77 to give knowledge of salvation to his people by forgiveness of their sins, 78 by our God's compassion of mercy, by which a sunrise out of high will come upon us, 79 in order to give glory to [those] that sit in darkness and death-shadow, to lead our feet on the path of peace.”
	80 And the child grew and was made mighty in spirit, and he was in the deserts until the day when he was going to show himself to Israel.

RANTA 2 
Ar túle ente auressen in etelende canwa Auhusto i Ingaranello note i quanda mar. 2 Minya notie sina martane íre Quirinio náne cáno Sírio. 3 Ilye queni lender náven nótine, ilquen véra ostoryanna. 4 Yú Yósef lende ama Alileallo, et i ostollo Nasaret, mir Yúrea, Láviro ostonna, ya estaina Vet-Lehem ná, pan anes maro ar onosseo Láviro, 5 náven nótina as María ye náne antauvaina sen vestalesse, ar ye sí náne as hína. 6 Íre engette tasse, i lúme túle yasse columnes lapserya. 7 Ar coldes yondorya, i minnóna, ar se-vaitanes ar panyane se *salquecolcasse, pan ua enge tún nóme mí *sendasse.  
	8 Enger mavalli i imya nóresse i marner i restasse, tirila imbileltar lómisse. 9 Ar i Héruo vala tarne ara te, ar i Héruo alcar caltane *os te, ar túra caure nampe te. 10 Mal i vala quente téna: ”Áva ruce, pan inye cára sinwa len túra alasse ya nauva i quanda lien, 11 an anaie cólina len síra *Rehto, ye ná Hristo, i Heru, Láviro ostosse. 12 Ar si nauva tanwa len: Hiruvalde vinimo, vaitana ar caitala *salquecolcasse.” 13 Ar rincanen enge as i vala rimbe i meneldea hosseo, laitala Eru ar quetila:  14 ”Alcar i tarmenissen na Erun, ar cemende raine i atanin pa i sanas mai.”
	15 Ar apa i vali oanter tello mir menel, i mavari quenter quén i exenna: ”Alve lelya Vet-Lehemenna cenien nat sina ya amartie, ya i Héru acárie sinwa ven.”  16 Ar lendelte hormenen ar hirner María ar Yósef ar i vinimo caitala i *salquecolcasse.  17 Íre cennelte se, carnelte sinwe i nati yar náner quétine téna pa hína sina. 18 Ar elmenda nampe ilquen hlarila pa i nati nyárine ten lo i mavari, 19 mal María hempe ilye quetier sine ar sanne pa tai endaryasse. 20 Tá i mavari nanwenner, antala alcar ar laitale Erun pa ilqua ya anelte hláriéla ar céniéla, aqua ve ta náne nyárina ten. 

CHAPTER 2
And it happened [lit. ”came”] in those days that a command went forth from Augustus the High King to count the whole world. 2 This first counting occurred while Qurinius was ruler of Syria. 3 All people went in order to be counted, everyone to his own city. 4 Also Joseph went up from Galilee, out of the city [of] Nazareth, into Judea, to David’s city, which is called Bethlehem, because he was of David’s house and family, 5 in order to be counted [along] with Mary who was to be given to him in marriage, and who now was with child. 6 While they [-ttë, dual] were there, the time came when [yasse = in which] she was to bear her baby. 7 And she bore her son, the firstborn, and swaddled him and put him in a manger [*salquecolca = grass-box], since [there] was not [any] room for them [tún, dual] at the inn.
	8 [There] were some shepherds [mavalli  = mavar-li, partitive plural] in that same country that dwelt in the field, watching their flocks in the night. 9 And the Lord’s angel stood by them, and the Lord’s glory shone about [*os] them, and great fear seized them. 10 But the angel said to them: ”Do not be afraid, for I am making known to you a great joy that will be for the entire people, 11 for [there] has been born to you today a Saviour, who is Christ, the Lord, in the city of David. 12 And this will be for you a sign: You will find an infant, swaddled and lying in a manger.” 13 And suddenly [rincanen = with a sudden move] [there] was with the angel a multitude of the heavenly army, praising God and saying: 14 “Glory be in the high places to God, and on earth peace to the men of whom he thinks well.”
	15 And after the angels went away from them into heaven, the shepherds said one to the other: ”Let us go to Bethlehem to see this thing that has happened, which the Lord has made known to us.” 16 And they went with urgency and found Mary and Joseph and the infant lying in the manger. 17 When they saw him, they made known the things that were said to them about this child. 18 And wonder seized everyone hearing about the things told to them by the shepherds, 19 but Mary kept these sayings and thought about them in her heart. 20 Then the shepherds went back, giving glory and praise to God about everything that they had heard and seen, wholly as that had been told to them.

21 Ar íre i toltea auresse túle, náveryan *oscirna, camnes i esse Yésus, yanen i vala estane se nó anes nostana i mónasse.
	22 Íre i auri poiciéva náner telyane Móseo Şanyenen, tallettes Yerúsalemenna panien se epe i Héru, 23 ve ná técina i Héruo Şanyesse: “Ilya hanu pantala móna nauva estaina aire i Hérun”, 24 ar taláven *yanca ve ná quétina i Héruo Şanyesse: “*Cucuolle atta hya nessa cucuo atta.”
	25 Ar yé! enge nér Yerúsalemesse yeo esse náne Símeon, ar nér sina náne faila ar rucila Erullo, hopila i tiutalen Israelwa, ar aire fea caine senna. 

21 And when the eighth day came, for him to be circumcised, he received the name Jesus, with which the angel called him before he was conceived in the womb.
	22 When the days of purification were completed by the Law of Moses, they [dual] brought him to Jerusalem to place him before [= present him to] the Lord, 23 as is written in the Law of the Lord: “Every male opening a womb will be called holy to the Lord”, 24 and to bring a sacrifice as is written in the Law of the Lord: “Two turtledoves or two young doves.”
	25 And behold! [there] was a man in Jerusalem whose name was Simeon, and this man was just and fearing God, waiting for the comfort of Israel, and holy spirit lay upon him. 

26 Ente, náne sen apantana in uas cenuva qualme nó cenie i Héruo Hristo. 27 I Fairenen sí túles i cordanna, ar íre i nostaru tallet i hína Yésus carien sen ya náne senwa i Şanyenen, 28 Símeon immo camne se mir rancuryat, ar laitanes Eru ar quente: “Sí, Tur, lavuval mólelyan auta rainesse ve equétiel, 30 an hendunyat ecéniet rehtielya, 31 ya amanwiel epe ilye i lier, 32 cala mapáven oa i vaşar i liendellon ar alcar Israel lielyan.” 33 Ar atarya yo amillerya nánet elmendasse pa i nati quétine pa se. 34 Ar Símeon aistane tu, mal quentes María amilleryanna: “Yé, si anaie panyana i lanten ar i ortien rimbalion Israelde, ar tanwa ana ya mo quete 35 – é lango menuva ter véra fealya – apantien rimbe endaron sanwi.”

36 Furthermore, it was revealed to him that he was not going to [Q: will not] see death before seeing the Christ of the Lord. 27 By the Spirit he now came to the temple, and when the parents [dual] brought the child Jesus to do to him what was usual by the Law, 28 Simeon himself received him into his arms, and he praised God and said: “Now, Master, you will allow your servant to pass away in peace as you have said, 30 for my eyes have seen your salvation, 31 that you have prepared before all the peoples, 32 a light to take away the veil from the nations and a glory to Israel your people. 33 And his father and his mother were [dual] were in wonder about the things said about him. 34 And Simeon blessed them, but he said to Mary his mother: “Behold, this one has been placed for the fall and for the rising of numeous ones in Israel, and a sign that one speaks against 35 – indeed a sword will go through your own soul – to reveal the thoughts of numerous hearts.”

	36 Ar enge nís estaina Anna, yelderya Fanuel nosseo Ahyero, ye náne *Erutercáne. Anes yára ar sáme rimbe loali, apa marnes as nér ter loar otso apa venesserya, 37 ar epeta anes *verulóra tenna sí sámes loar canta *toloquean. Únes oi oa i cordallo, mal *veuyanes Eru auresse yo lómisse, hepila lamati ar yalila henna. 38 Ar yana lúmesse orontes ar antane Erun hantale, ar carampes pa i hína ilyannar i yenter ompa i ehtelehtienna Yerúsalenwa. 
	39 Ar apa telyanette ilqua i Héruo Şanyenen nanwennette Alileanna ar ostottanna, Násaret. 40 Ar i hína alle ar *yestane náve polda, nála quátina sailiénen, ar Erulisse caine senna. 

	36 And [there] was a woman called Anna, daughter of Fanuel of the tribe [or kin] of Asher, who was a prophet. She was old and had [an age of] many years, after she dwelt with a man for [ter, through] seven years after her virginhood, 37 and thereafter she was widowed until she now had [an age of] eighty-four years. She was not ever away from the temple, but she served God day and night, keeping fasts and calling upon him. 38 And in that hour she arose and gave thanks to God, and she talked about the child to all that looked forward to the deliverance of Jerusalem.
	39 And after they [dual – the parents] completed everything by the Law of the Lord they returned to Galilee and their city, Nazareth. 40 And the child grew [or thrived] and started to be strong, being filled with wisdom, and grace rested on him.

41 Ilya loasse nostaruryat lendet Yerúsalemanna, i aşarenna Lahtiéno. 42 Ar íre sámes loar yunque, lendelte ama i aşaro situnen 42 ar telyaner i rí. Mal íre nanwennette, Yésus i seldo lemne Yerúsalemesse, ar nostaruryat uat túne sa. 44 Intyala i náse imíca i queni lelyala uo, lendette er aureo tie; tá cestanettes imíca rendottar ar i queni i sintette. 45 Mal íre uatte hirne se, entúlette Yerúsalemenna, cestala se. 46 Ar apa auri nelde hirnettes i cordasse, hámala imíca i *peantari, lastala téna ar maquetila téna. 47 Mal illi i lastaner senna náner captane handeryanen ar hanquentaryainen. 48 Sí íre cennettes anette elmendasse, ar amillerya quente senna: “Hína, mana castatya carien ment sie? Yé, ataretya yo inye nánet ñwalyaine, cestala tye!” 49 Mal quentes túna: “Mana castasta cestien ni? Ma uaste sinte i mauya nin náve i coasse Atarinyava?” 50 Mal uatte hanyane i quetie ya quentes túna. 

41 Every year his parents [dual] went to Jerusalem, to the festival of Passover. 42 And when he had [an age of] twelve years, they [pl.] went according to [-nen] the tradition of the festival 42 and completed the days. But when they [dual = the parents] returned, Jesus the boy remained in Jerusalem, and his parents did not notice it. 44 Supposing that he was [Q: is] among the people traveling together, they went a distance of one day; then they sought him among their relatives and the people that they knew. 45 But when they did not find him, they returned to Jerusalem, seeking him. 46 And after three days they found him in the temple, sitting among the teachers, listening to them and asking them. 47 But all that listened to him were startled by [-nen] his understanding and by his answers. 48 Now when they [dual = the parents] saw him they were in wonder, and his mother said to him: “Child, what is your reason for doing so to us? Behold, your father and I were tormented, seeking you!” 49 But he said to them: “What is your reason for seeking me? Did you not know that it is necessary for me to be in the house of my Father?” 50 But they did not understand the saying that he said to them.

51 Ar lendes undu asette ar túle Nasaretenna, ar cimnes canwattar. Ar amillerya hempe ilye nati sine endaryasse. 52 Ar Yésus lende ompa mi sailie ar alie ar lisse mici Eru ar atani. 

51 And he went down with them and came to Nazareth, and he heeded their commands. And his mother kept all these things in her heart. 52 And Jesus went forward in wisdom and growth and grace among God and men.

RANTA 3
I *lepenquea loasse yasse Tivério turne ve Ingaran, íre Pontio Piláto náne nórecáno Yúreo, ar Herol turne ve *canastatur mi Alilea, ar Filip hánorya turne ve *canastatur mí ménar Ituréa ar Traconitis, ar Lisánias náne i *canastatur Aviléneo, 2 íre Annas ar Caiafas náner hére *airimor, Eruo quetta túle ana Yoháno Secarío yondo i ravandasse.
	3 Ar lendes i quanda ménanna *os Yordan, carila sinwa sumbie inwistiéno ya anta apsenie úcariva, 4 ve ná técina i parmasse quettaron Yesaia i Erutercáno: “Óma queno ye yáma i ravandasse: Alde manwa i Heruo malle, cara tieryar tére! 5 Ilya yáwe nauva quátina, ar ilya oron ar ambo nauva cárina lára, ar i lúvar nauvar cárine tére tieli ar i tumpur paste malleli, 6 ar ilya hráve cenuva Eruo rehtie.”

CHAPTER 3
In the fifteenth year in which Tiberius ruled as High King [or, Emperor], when Pontius Pilate was governor [nórecáno: land-commander], and Herod ruled as farthing-ruler in Galilee, and Philip his brother ruled as farthing-ruler in the regions [of] Iturea and Traconitis, and Lysenias was the farthing-ruler of Abilene, 2 while Annas and Caiaphas were chief priests, God's word came to John, Zechariah's son, in the wilderness.
	3 And he went to the entire region around Jordan, making known baptism of repentance which gives forgivenes of sins, 4 as is written in the book of the words of Isaiah the Prophet: ”A voice that is crying in the wilderness: You prepare the Lord's way, make his paths straight! 5 Every gully will be filled, and every mountain and hill will be made flat, and the bends will be made straight paths and the humps smooth roads, 6 and all flesh will see God's salvation.”

	7 Etta quentes i şangannar ettulila náven sumbane lo sé: “A hínar leucoron, man anyárie len manen uşe i tuluvaila rúşello? 8 Etta cara yávi valde inwisto. Ar áva *yesta quete indenna: 'Ve atar samilve Avraham.' An quétan lenna in Eru pole orta híni Avrahámen sine sarnollon. 9 É i pelecco yando sí caita ara i aldaron şundo; etta ilya alda ye ua care mára yáve nauva círina undu ar hátina mir i náre.”
	10 Ar i şangar maquenter senna: “Tá mana caruvalme?” 11 Hanquentasse quentes téna: “Mauya i neren ye same laupe atta, anta er i quenen ye ua same, ar mauya yen same natali matien care i imya.” 

	7 Therefore he said to the crowds coming out to be baptized by him: ”Children of serpents, who has told you how to escape from the coming wrath? 8 Therefore produce fruits worthy of repentance. And do not begin to say to yourselves: 'As father we have Abraham.' For I say to you that God can rise [up] children to Abraham from these stones. 9 Indeed the axe even now lies by the root of the trees; therefore every tree that does not make good fruit will be cut down and thrown into the fire.” 
	10 And the crowds asked him: ”Then what are we to do?” 11 In answer he said to them: “It is necessary for the man who has two tunics, to give one to the person that does not have, and it is necessary for [him] who has things to eat to do the same.”

12 Mal yú *tungwemóli túler náven sumbane, ar quentelte senna: “*Peantar, mana caruvalme?” 13 Quentes téna: ”Áva cane telpe han i vanima nonwe.” 14 Ente, i móler mí hosse maquenter senna: “Mana elme caruvar?” Ar quentes téna: “Áva tarce aiquen, ar áva quete huruvi pa ongwi yar queni uar acárier, mal lava *paityalelda farya len.”
	15 Sí i quanda lie yente ompa yanna martumne, ar illi sanner endaltasse pa Yoháno: ”Cé sé i Hristo ná?” 16 Yoháno hanquente illin: “Inye *tumya le nennen;  mal túla ye ná polda lá ni; inye ua valda lehtien hyaparyato latta. Le-*tumyuvas Aire Feanen ar nárenen. 17 *Saltamarya ea máryasse poitien *vattalamya, ar comyauvas orirya mir i haura, mal i *ospor urtuavas nárenen ya *úquen pole *luhtya.”

12 But also tax collectors came to be baptized, and they said to him: “Teacher, what are we to do?” 13 He said to them: “Do not demand money beyond the proper sum.” 14 Furthermore, [those] who worked in the army asked him: “What are we to do?” And he said to them: “Do not harass anyone, and do not speak lies about crimes that people have not committed, but let your payment suffice for you.”
	15 Now the entire people looked forward to what would happen, and all thought in their heart about John: “Perhaps he is the Christ?” 16 John answered them: “I baptize you with water; but [there] comes [the one] who is stronger than I; I am not worthy to loose the strap of his shoes [dual]. He will baptize you with Holy Spirit and with fire. 17 His winnowing fork is in his hand to cleanse his threshing floor, and he will gather his grain into the store, but the chaff he will burn with a fire that no one can extinguish.”

18 Etta antanes yú rimbe hyane hortiéli ar carne i evandilyon sinwa i lien. 19 Mal Herol i *canastatur, íre anes naityana lo se pa Herólias hánoryo veri ar pa ilye i olce cardar yar Herol carne, 20 napanne yú nat sina ilye tane cardain: panyanes Yoháno mandosse. 
	21 Sí íre i quanda lie náne sumbana, yú Yésus náne sumbana, ar íre hyamnes, menel náne pantana 22 ar i Aire Fea, *hroacantasse cucuo, ununte senna, ar óma túle et menello: “Elye yondonya ná, i melda; lyénen nanye fastana.” 

18 Therefore he gave also many other urgings and made the gospel known to the people. 19 But Herod the farthing-ruler, when he was rebuked by him concerning Herodias his brother's wife and concerning the wicked deeds that Herod did, 20 added also this thing to all those deeds: he put John in prison.
	21 Now when the whole people was baptized, also Jesus was baptized, and as he prayed, heaven was opened 22 and the Holy Spirit, in body-shape of a dove, came down upon him, and a voice came out of heaven: “You are my son, the beloved; with you I am pleased.” 

	22 Ar Yésus immo, molieryo yestasse, sáme *os loar *nelequean. Anes, mo intyane, yondorya Yósef, yondorya Heli, 24 yondorya Mattat, yondorya Levi, yondorya Melci, yondorya Yannai, yondorya Yósef, 25 yondorya Mattatías, yondorya Ámos, yondorya Nahum, yondorya Esli, yondorya Nangai, 26 yondorya Maat, yondorya Mattatías, yondorya Semein, yondorya Yósec, yondorya Yóra, 

22 And Jesus himself, at the beginning of his labor, had [an age of] around thirty years. He was, one supposed, son of Joseph, son of Heli, 24 son of Matthat, son of Levi, son of Melchi, son of Jannai, son of Joseph, 25 son of Mattathias, son of Amos, son of Nahum, son of Esli, son of Naggai, 26 son of Maath, son of Mattathias, son of Semein, son of Josech, son of Joda, 

27 yondorya Yoanan, yondorya Resa, yondorya Seruvável, yondorya Hyealtiel, yondorya Neri, 28 yondorya Melci, yondorya Atti, yondorya Cosam, yondorya Elmáram, yondorya Ér, 29 yondorya Yésus, yondorya Eliéser, yondorya Yórim, yondorya Mattat, yondorya Levi, 30 yondorya Símeon, yondorya Yúras, yondorya Yósef, yondorya Yónam, yondorya Elyacim, 31 yondorya Melea, yondorya Menna, yondorya Mattata, yondorya Nátan, yondorya Lávir, 32 yondorya Yesse, yondorya Over, yondorya Voas, yondorya Salmon, yondorya Naxon, 33 yondorya Amminarav, yondorya Arni, yondorya Ħesron, yondorya Peres, yondorya Yehúra, 34 yondorya Yácov, yondorya Ísac, yondorya Avraham, yondorya Teraħ, yondorya Naħor, 35 yondorya Seru, yondorya Rëu, yondorya Pele, yondorya Ever, yondorya Hyelaħ, 36 yondorya Cainan, yondorya Arpaxar, yondorya Hyém, yondorya Noaħ, yondorya Lámec, 37 yondorya Metúselaħ, yondorya Enoc, yondorya Yárel, yondorya Mahalaleél, yondorya Cainan, 38 yondorya Enos, yondorya Sét, yondorya Atan, Eruo yondo.

27 son of Joanan, son of Rhesa, son of Zerubbabel, son of Shealtiel, son of Neri, 28 son of Melchi, son of Addi, son of Cosam, son of Elmadam, son of Er, 29 son of Jesus, son of Eliezer, son of Jorim, son of Matthat, son of Levi, 30 son of Symeon, son of Judas, son of Josef, son of Jonam, son of Eliakim, 31 son of Melea, son of Menna, son of Mattatha, son of Nathan, son of David, 32 son of Jesse, son of Odeb, son of Boaz, son of Salmon, son of Nahshon, 33 son of Amminadab, son of Arni, son of Hezron, 34 son of Jacob, son of Isaac, son of Abraham, son of Terah, son of Nahor, 35 son of Serug, son of Reu, son of Peleg, son of Eber, son of Shelah, 36 son of Cainan, son of Arpachshad, son of Shem, son of Noah, son of Lamech, 37 son of Methuselah, so of Enoch, son of Jared, son of Mahallaleel, son of Cainan, 38 son of Enosh, son of Set, son of Adam, God's son.

RANTA 4
Ar Yésus, quanta Aire Feo, lende oa Yordanello ar náne tulyana lo i Faire mir i erume 2 aurin *canaquean, nála şahtaina lo i Arauco. Ar mantes munta yane auressen, ar íre anelte vanwe, anes maita. 3 Tá i Arauco quente senna: “Qui nalye Eruo yondo, queta sar sinanna: Ola massa!” 4 Mal Yésus hanquente senna: “Ná técina: Atan ua samuva coire massanen erinqua.”
	5 Tá se-tulyanes ama ar tanne sen ilye aranier ambaro mí erya lú, 6 ar i Arauco quente senna: “Antauvan lyen ilya túre sina ar alcarelta, an anaies antana nin, ar antauvanyes aiquenen ye merin. 7 Etta, qui elye anta tyerme nín, ilqua nauva véralya.” 8 Hanquentasse Yésus quente senna: “Ná técina: I Héru Ainolyan alye anta tyerme, ar sen erinqua alye na núro.”

And Jesus, full of Holy Sprit, went away from Jordan and was led by the Spirit into the desert 2 for forty days, being tempted by the Devil. And he ate nothing in those days, and when they were gone, he was hungry. 3 Then the Devil said to him: “If you are God's son, say to this stone: Become bread!” 4 But Jesus answered him: “[It] is written: Man shall not have life by bread alone.” 
	5 Then he led him up and showed him all the kingdoms of [the] world in a single moment, 6 and the Devil said to him: “I shall give you all this power and their glory, for it has been given to me, and I will give it to anyone that I wish. 7 Therefore, if you give worship to me, everything shall be your own.” 8 In answer Jesus said to him: “[It] is written: To the Lord your God you are to give worship, and to him alone you are to be a servant.”

	9 Sí se-tulyanes mir Yérusalem ar panyane i cordo rámasse ar quente senna: “Qui nalye Eruo yondo, hata imle undu silo, an técina ná: Canuvas valaryain pa lye, hepieltan lye, 11 ar: Coluvalte lye máltatse, pustien lye petiello talelya sarnenna.” 12 Hanquentasse Yésus quente senna: “Ná quétina: Vá tyastuval i Héru Ainolya.” 13 Tá i Arauco, telyaniéla i quanda úşahtie, oante sello tenna hyana lúme.
	14 Sí Yésus nanwenne i Faireo túresse mir Alilea. Ar mára quetie pa sé vintane ter i quanda pelila noórie. 15 Ar peantanes *yomencoaltassen, camila laitale ho illi.
	16 Ar túles Nasaretenna, yasse anes ortana, ar ve haimerya né mittanes i *yomencoa, ar orontes hentien.

	9 Now he led him into Jerusalem and put him on the wing of the temple and said to him: “If you are God's son, throw yourself down from here, for [it] is written: He will command his angels concerning you, for them to keep you, 21 and: They will carry you on their hands, to stop you from striking your foot against [any] stone.” 12 In answer Jesus said to him: “It is said: Do not test the Lord your God.” 13 Then the Devil, having completed the entire temptation, went away from him until another time.
	14 Now Jesus returned in the power of the Spirit into Galilee. And good talk about him spread throughout the entire surrounding country. 15 And he taught in their synagogues, receiving praise from all.
	16 And he came to Nazareth, where he was raised, and as his habit was he entered the synagogue, and he arose to read.

17 Tá Yesaia i Erutercáno *toluparma náne antana sen, ar pantanes i parma ar hirne i nóme yasse náne tícina: 18 “I Héruo faire ea nisse, an ni-*elpanes antáven máre sinyali penyain; ni-mentanes carien sinwa quenin mandosse i nauvalte leryane ar lacenítin i camuvalte *céne, mentien i rácinar oa lehtiénen, 19 carien sinwa i Héruo loa mára nirmeo.” 20 Ar tolunes i parma, antane sa nn i núron ar hamune; ar hendu illion i enger i *yomencoasse nánet panyane sesse. 21 Tá *yestanes quete téna: “Síra tehtele sina anaie carna nanwa íre hlasseldes.” 
	22 Ar illi *vettaner pa se, ar enger elmendasse pa i raine quettar yar túler et antoryallo, ar quentelte: “Ma nér sina ua Yósefo yondo?” 

17 Then the scroll [tolu-parma 'roll-book'] of Isaiah the Prophet was given to him, and he opened the book and found the place where [it] was written: 18 “The spirit of the Lord is on me, for he annointed me to give good news to poor ones; he sent me to make known to people in prison that they will be freed and to blind ones that they will receive sight, to send the broken ones away by a release, 19 to make known the Lord's year of good will.” 20 And he rolled up the book, gave it back to the servant and sat down; and the eyes of all that were in the synagogue were fixed on him. 21 Then he began to say to them: “Today this scripture has been made true while you heard it.”
	22 And all witenssed about him, and they were in wonder about the gracious words that came out of his mouth, and they said: “Is this man not Joseph's son?”

23 Tá quentes téna: “É merilde quete ninna eques sina: 'Aşaro, á nesta imle! I nati yar ahlárielme martaner Capernaumesse, cara tai yú sisse véra ménalyasse!” 24 Mal eques: “Násie quétan lenna i ua ea Erutercáno ye ná mai cámina véra ménaryasse. 25 An mi nanwie quétan lenna: Enger rimbe *verulórali Israelde Elío auressen, íre menel náne holtana ter loar nelde ar astari enque, tyarila túra saicele lanta i nórenna; 26 ananta Elía úne mentana aiquenna mici té, mal Sarefatenna mi Sírono nóre, *verulóra nissenna tasse. 27 Ente, enger rimbe helmahlaiwali Israelde Elíhya i Erutercáno lúmesse, ananta *úquen mici té náne poitana, mal Náman Siriallo.” 28 Ar illi i hlasser nati sine i *yomencoasse náner quátine ahanen, 29 ar orontelte ar se-hortaner i osto ettenna, ar tulyaneltes lancanna i oronto yasse ostolta náne carastana, hatien se undu talo. 30 Mal sé menne ter endelta ar lende oa.

23 Then he said to them: “Indeed you want to say to me this proverb: Healer, heal yourself! The things that we have heard happened in Capernaum, do them also here in your own region!” 24 But he said: “Truly I say to you that there is not [any] prophet that is well received in his own region. 25 For in truth I say to you: There were numerous widows in Israel in the days of Eliah, when heaven was shut for [ter, “through”] three years and six months, causing a great famine to fall upon the land; 26 and yet Eliah was not sent to anyone among them, but to Zarephath in the land of Sidon, to a widowed woman there. 27 Furthermore, [there] were numerous skin-diseased ones in Israel at the time of Elisha the prophet, and yet no one among them was cleansed, but Naaman from Syria.” 28 And all that heard these things in the synagogue were filled with rage, 29 and they arose and hurried him to the outside of the city, and their led him to the brow of the mountain on which their city was built, to throw him down from there. 30 But he walked through their midst and went away. 

31 Ar lendes undu Caparnaumenna, osto Alileasse. Ar peantanes tien i *sendaresse, 31 ar anelte quátine elmendo i lénen ya peantanes, an quetierya sáme túre. 33 Ar enge i *yomencoasse nér  haryana lo faire, úpoica rauco, ar yámes taura ómanen: 34 “Ai! Mana men ar lyen, Yésus Nasaretello? Ma utúliel nancarien me? Istan man nalye, Eruo Aire!” 35 Ar Yésus naityane se, quetila: “Na quilda ar tula et sello!” Ar apa hatie i nér undu endeltasse, i rauco túle et sello, ú maliéno se. 36 Tá elmenda lantane illinnar, ar carampelte quén as i exe, quetila: “Mana nostale quetiéno ná si? An túrenen ar melehtenen canis i úpoice fairi, ar ettulilte!” 37 Ar i sinyar pa se *etelender mir ilya nóme i pelila noriesse.
	38 Apa autie i *yomencoallo lendes mir coarya Símon. Mal Símondo verio amil náne tarcaina túra úrenen, ar carnelte arcande sen pa sé. 

31 And he went down to Capernaum, a city in Galilee. And he taught them on the day of rest, 31 and they were filled with wonder by the manner that he taught, for his speech had power. 33 And [there] was in the synagoge a man possessed by a spirit, an unclean demon, and it cried with a mighty voice: 34 “Ah! What [is] there to us and to you [= what do you have to do with our matters], Jesus from Nazareth? Have you come to destroy us? I know who you are, the Holy One of God!” 35 And Jesus rebuked it, saying: “Be silent and come out of him!” And after throwing the man down in their midst, the demon  came out of him, without hurting him. 36 Then wonder fell upon all, and they talked one with the other, saying: “What kind of speech is this? For with power and with might he commands the unclean spirits, and they come out!” 37 And the news about him went out in every place in the surrounding country.
	38 After leaving the synagoge he went into the house of Simon. But Simon's wife's mother was troubled by a great fever [úre, 'heat'], and they made petition to him about her.

39 Ar tarnes or i nís ar naityane i úre, ar ta oante sello. Mí imya lú orontes ar *veuyane tien.
	40 Mal Anaro nútiesse, illi i sámer queni hlaiwe hlívínen sina hya sana nostaleo taller te senna. Paniénen máryat tesse nestanéset. 41 Ente, raucoli ettúler rimballon, yamila ar quetila: “Elye Eruo yondo ná!” Mal naicines te ar ua láve tien quete, pan sintelte i náse i Hristo.
	42 Ono íre aure túle, etelendes ar menne eressea nómenna. Mal i şangar cestaner se, ar túlelte yanna enges, ar névelte pusta se autiello tello. 43 Mal quentes téna: “Yú i hyane ostoin mauya nin care sinwa i evandilyon, an ta ná i casta yanen anen etementana.” 44 Ar lendes carila i menta sinwa Yúreo *yomencoassen.

39 And he stood above the woman and rebuked the fever, and that went away from her. In the same moment she arose and served for them. 
	40 But at the setting of the sun, all that had people sick with illnesses of this or that kind  brought them to him. By putting his hands on them he healed them. 41 Furthermore, demons came out from numerous ones, crying and saying: “You are God's son.” But he rebuked them and did not allow them to speak, since they knew that he was [Q: is] the Christ.
	42 But when day came, he went out and went to a lonely place. But the crowds sought him, and they came to where he was, and they tried to stop him from going away from them. 43 But he said to them: “Also to the other cities it is necessary for me to make known the gospel, for that is the reason why [yanen = by which] I was sent forth.” 44 And he went making the message known in the synagogues of Judea.

RANTA 5 
Mi lú yasse i şanga ninde senna, lastala Eruo quettanna, tarnes ara i ailin Ennesaret. 2 Ar cennes lunte atta caitala ara i ailin, mal i *raitari náner ménienwe et tullo ar sóvaner rembeltar. 3 Lelyala mir er i luntion, ya náne Símonwa, arcanes sello lelya şinta tie i norello. Tá hamunes, ar i luntello peantanes i şangain.
	Íre pustanes quete, quentes Símonna: “Á lelya yanna núra ná, ar alde panya undu rembeldar mapien.” 5 Mal hanquentasse Símon quente: “*Peantar, ter i quanda lóme omótielme ar namper munta, mal canwalyanen panyuvan i rembeltar undu.”
	6 Íre carnelte sie, yórelte hoa rimbe lingwíva, ar rembeltar náner narcaine. 7 Ar hwernelte *rantarwaltain i hyana luntesse tulieltan manien tien, ar túlelte, ar quantelte yúyo lunte, tenna súvanette. 

CHAPTER 5
At an occasion when the crowd pressed against him, listening to God's word, he stood by the lake [of] Gennesaret. 2 And he saw two boats lying [on the shore] by the lake, but the fishermen had gone out of them [dual] and were washing their nets. 3 Going into one of the boats, which was Simon's, he asked him to go a short distance [tie = path, direction] from the land. Then he sat down, and from the boat he taught the crowds.
	When he ceased to speak, he said to Simon: “Go to where it is deep, and you [pl.] put down your nets for a catch.” 5 But in answer Simon said: “Teacher, throughout the entire night we have toiled and caught nothing, but at [-nen] your order I will put the nets down.”
	6 When they did so, they enclosed a great multitude of fishes, and their nets were being torn. 7 And they gestured to their partners in the other boat for them to come to help them, and they came, and they filled both boats, until they [dual] were sinking,

8 Íre cennes ta, Símon Péter lantane undu epe Yésuo occat, quetila: “Á auta nillo, an nanye *úcarunqua nér, Heru!” 9 An i mapávenen lingwíva anes pétina elmendanen, sé ar illi i náner óse, 10 ar yú yúyo Yácov yo Yoháno, yondoryar Severai, i nánet *rantarwali as Símon. Mal Yésus quente Símonna: “Áva ruce! Ho sí mapuval atani coirie.” 11 Ar ttallelte i lunti norenna ar hehtaner ilqua ar hilyaner sé. 
	12 Ar íre anes mi er i ostoron, yé! nér quanta helmahlíveo. Íre cennes Yésus lantanes cendeleryanna ar inque sello, quetila: “Heru, qui meril, polil poita ni!” 13 Ar eterahtala máryanen Yésus se-appane, quetila: “Merin! Na poitana!” Ar mí imya lú i helmahlíve váne sello. 14 Ar cannes i neren: “Nyara *uquenen, mal á auta ar tana imle i *airimon, ar ve Móses canne cara *yanca poitielyan, ve *vettie tien.” 15 Mal i quetta pa se vintane ta ita ambe, ar hoe şangali túler uo lastien ar náven nestane hlíveltallon. 16 Ono lendes oa mir i erumi, hyamila.

8 When he saw that, Simon Peter fell down before Jesus' knees, saying: “Go away from me, for I am a sinful man, Lord!” 9 For by the catch of fishes he was struck with wonder, he and all that were with him, 10 and also both Jacob and John, the sons of Zebedee, that were partners with Simon. But Jesus said to Simon: “Do not be afraid! From now you will catch men alive.” 11 And they brought the boats to land and abandoned everything and followed him.
	12 And when he was in one of the cities, behold! a man full of skin-disease. When he saw Jesus he fell upon his face and begged of him, saying: “Lord, if you want to, you can cleanse me!” 13 And reaching out with his hand Jesus touched him, saying: “I want to! Be cleansed!” And in the same moment the skin-disease disappeared from him. 14 And he commanded the man: “Tell nobody, but go away and show yourself to the priest, and as Moses commended made a sacrifice for your cleansing, as a witness to them.” 15 But the word about him scattered that much more, and great crowds came together to listen and to be healed from their sicknesses. 16 But he went away into the deserts, praying.

	17 Martane mi aure i anes peantala, ar Farisali ar *peantalli i Şanyeo i náner túlienwe et ilya mastollo Alileo ar Yúreo ar Yerúsalémo hamner tasse, ar i Héruo túre náne tasse, polieryan nesta. 18 Ar yé! ennoli túler colila caimasse nér ye náne *úlévima, ar cestanelte tala se ompa ar panya se epe Yésus. 19 Mal íre ualte hirne manen poldelte cole se ompa, castanen i şango, rentelte i tópanna, ar ter i tupse nútaneltes as i caima, i endesse epe Yésus. 20 Ar íre cennes savielta quentes: “Atan, úcarelyar nar apsénine lyen!”

	17 It happened in a day that he was teaching, and some Pharisees and teachers of the Law that had come from every village of Galilee and of Judea and of Jerusalem sat there, and the Lord's power was there, for him to be able to heal. 18 And behold! some people came carrying on a bed a man that was lame, and they sought to bring him forward and put him before Jesus. 19 But when they did not find how they could carry him forward, by reason of the crowd, they climbed to the roof, and through the thatch they lowered him down with the bed, in the middle before Jesus. 20 And when he saw their faith he said: “Man, your sins are forgiven you!”

21 Ar i parmangolmor ar i Farisar *yestaner sana, quetila: “Man ná nér sina ye quéta naiquetier? Man lerta apsene úcari hequa Eru erinqua?” 22 Mal Yésus, tuntala sanweltar, quenter hanquentasse téna: “Pa mana sánealde endaldassen? 23 Mana i ambe *aşcare: quete 'Úcarelyar nar apsénine lyen' hya quete: 'Á orta, mapa caimalya ar mena coalyanna.' 24 Mal istieldan i same i Atanyondo túre cemende apsenien úcari –” quentes i *úlévima nerenna: “Quétan lyenna, á orta ar mapa ama caimalya ar mena coalyanna.” 25 Ar mi imya lú orontes epe te, nampe ama ta yasse yá caines, ar lende coaryanna antala alcar Erun. 26 Tá illi mici te náner ara inte, ar antanelte alcar Erun ar náner quátine caureo, quetila: “Ecénielve elmendali síra!”

21 And the scribes an the Pharisees started to think, saying: “Who is this man that is speaking blasphemies? Who may forgive sins except God alone?” 22 But Jesus, perceiving their thoughts, said in answer to them: “About what are you thinking in your hearts? 23 What is the [thing] more easily done, saying 'Your sins are forgiven to you' or saying: “Rise, take your bed and go to your house.' 24 But for you to know that the Son of Man has power on earth to forgive sins” – he said to the lame man: “I say to you, rise and take up your bed and go to your house.” 25 And in the same moment he arose before them, took up that on which he lay, and went to his house giving glory to God. 26 Then all among them were beside themselves, and they gave glory to God and were filled with fear, saying: “We have seen wonders today!”

	27 Ar apa nati sine *etelendes ar cenne *tungwemo estaina Lévi hamila mí *tungwemen, ar quentes senna: “Áni hilya.” 28 Ar hehtala ilqua orontes and hilyane se. 29 Ente, Lévi carne túra merende sen coaryasse, ar enge hoa şanga, *tungwemóli ar exeli, i náner aselte ara i sarno. 30 Ar i Farisar ar parmangolmoltar nurruner hildoryannar, quetila: “Manen ná i matilde ar sucilde as *tungwemóli ar úcarindoli?” 31 Hanquentasse Yésus quente téna: “I samir mále uar same maure *nestondova, mal i nar engwe. 32 Utúlien yale, lá failar, mal *úcarindor inwistenna.”
	33 Quentelte senna: “Hildoryar Yoháno rimbave hepir lamate ar carir arcandeli, mal véralyar matir ar sucir.” 34 Yésus quente téna: “Lau polilde mauya i endero meldoin hepe lamate lan i ender ea aselte? Ananta aureli tuluvar yassen i ender nauva mapana oa tello; tá hepuvalte lamate, ente auressen.

	27 And after these things he went forth and saw a tax-collector called Levi sitting at the tax office, and he said to him: “Follow me.” 28 And abandoning everything he arose and followed him. 29 Furthermore, Levi made a great feast for him at his house, and [there] was a great crowd, tax collectors and others, that were with them at the table. 30 And the Pharisees and their scribes grumbled against his disciples, saying: “How is [it] that you eat and you drink with tax collectors and sinners?” 31 In answer Jesus said to them: “[Those] that have health do not have need of a healer, but [those] that are sickly. 32 I have come to call, not just ones, but sinners to repentence.”
	33 They said to him: “John's disciples frequently keep fast and make supplications, but your own eat and drink.” 34 Jesus said to them: “Surely you cannot compel the bridegroom's friends to keep a fast fast while the bridegroom is with them? And yet days shall come in which the bridegroom will be taken away from them; then they shall keep fast, in those days.”

	36 Ente, quentes téna sestie: “*Úquen cire lanneranta ho vinya colla ar neme sa yára collasse, mal qui mo é care sie, tá i vinya lanneranta narca oa; ente, i lanneranta ho i vinya colla ua vávea i yáran. 37 Ar *úquen panya vinya limpe yáre *helmolpessen, mal qui mo é care sie, tá i vinya limpe *ruve i *helmolpi, ar ulyas ettenna ar i *helmolpi nar nancarne. 38 Mal mauya panya vinya limpe vinye *helmolpessen! 39 *Úquen ye usúcie yára limpe mere vinya, an quetis: 'I yára mára ná.'”

	36 Furthermore, he spoke this comparison: “No one cuts a cloth-piece from a new cloak and sews it in an old cloak, but if one indeed does so, then the new cloth-piece tears away; furthermore, the cloth-piece from the new cloak is not similar to [= does not match] the old. 37 And no one puts new wine in old skin-bottles, but if one indeed does so, then the new wine bursts the skin-bottles, and it flows out and the skin-bottles are destroyed. 38 But it is necessary to put new wine in new skin-bottles! 39 No one who has drunk old wine wants new, for he says: 'The old is good.'”

RANTA 6
Túle *sendaresse i lendes ter orirestali, ar hildoryar leptaner ar manter i cari oriva, ascatila tai máltatse. 2 Mal ennoli i Farisaron quenter: “Manen ná i cáralde ya ua lávina i *sendaresse?” 3 Mal Yésus hanquente téna: “Ma ualde oi ehentie pa ya Lávir carne íre sé ar i neri óse náner maite? 4 Lendes mir i coa Eruva ar camne i mastar taniéva ar mante ar antane tai i nerin óse, ómu tai uar lávina matso aiquenen hequa i *airimoin erinque.” 5 Ar quentes téna: “I Atanyondo ná Heru i *sendareo.”
	6 Túle hyana *sendaresse i lendes mir i *yomencoa ar peantane. Ar enge tasse nér yeo forma náne hessa. 7 I parmangolmor ar i Farisar tíraner se, cenien qui nestumnes aiquen i *sendaresse, hirieltan lé yanen poldelte *ulquete se. 8 Mal sintes manen sannelte, ananta quentes i nerenna arwa i hessa máo: “Á orta ar tara i endesse.” Ar orontes ar tarne tasse. 9 Tá Yésus quente téna: “Maquétan lello: Ma ná lávina i *sendaresse care márie hya care ulco, rehta quén hya nancare se?”

CHAPTER 6
It happened [lit. came] on a day of restthat he went through some grain-fields [ori-resta-li], and his disciples picked and ate the heads of grain, crushing them in their hand. 2 But some of the Pharisees said: “How is [it] that you are doing what is not allowed on the day of rest?” 
	3 But Jesus answered them: “Have you not ever read about that which David did when he and the men with him were hungry? 4 He went into God's house and received the breads of presentation [taníeva = of showing] and ate and gave them to the men with him, though they are not permitted food for anyone except for the priests alone.” 5 And he said to them: “The Son of Man is Lord of the day of rest.”
	6 It happened [lit. came] on another day of rest taht he went into the synagogue and taught. And [there] was there a man whose right hand was withered. 7 The scribes and the Pharisees were watching him, to see if he was going to heal anyone on the day of rest, for them to find a way [lé] with which they could accuse him. 8 But he knew how they thought, and yet he said to the man having the withered hand: “Rise and stand in the middle.” And he arose and stood there. 9 Then Jesus said to them: “I ask of you: Is it allowed on the day of rest to do good or to do evil, to save a person or to destroy him?”

10 Ar apa yentes illi mici te, quenello quenenna, quentes i nerenna: “Á rahta mályanen!” Carnes sie, ar márya náne envinyanta. 11 Mal anelte quátine urşanen, ar quentelte pa mana carumnelte Yésun.
	12 Túle ente auressen i lendes ama mir i oron hyamien, ar lemnes tasse ter i lóme, hyamiesse Erunna. 13 Mal íre aure túle, yaldes hildoryar ar ciller ho mici te yunque, i yú estanes aposteli: 14 Símon, ye yú estanes Péter, ar Andréo hánorya, ar Yácov and Yoháno, ar Filip ar Varşoloméo 15 ar  Mattéo ar Şomas ar Yácov yondorya Alfaio, ar Símon ye ná estaina i Selot, 16 ar Yúra yondorya Yácov, ar Yúras Iscariot, ye *vartane se.
	17 Ar túles undu aselte ar tarne palaresse, ar enge hoa liyúme queniva ho i quanda Yúrea ar Yerúsalem ar ho i earménar *os Tír ar Siron, i túler hlarien se ar náven nestane hlíveltaron. 18 Yú i náner tarcaine lo úpoice faireli náner nestaine. 19 Ar i quanda şanga cestaner appa se, an níre lende et sello ar nestane illi mici te.

10 And after he looked at all among them, from person to person, he said to the man: “Reach out with your hand!” He did so, and his hand was healed. 11 But they were filled with rage, and spoke about what they were going to do to Jesus.
	12 It happened [lit. 'came'] in those days that he went up into the mountain to pray, and he remained there through the night, in prayer to God 13 But when day came, he summoned his disciples and chose from among them twelve, that he also named apostles: 14 Simon, whom he also called Peter, and Andrew his brother, and Jacob and John, and Phillip and Bartholomew 15 and Matthew and Thomas and Jacob the son of Alphaeus, and Simon who is called the Zealot, 16 and Judah son of Jacob, and Judas Iscariot, who betrayed him.
	17 And he came down with them and stood on a plain, and [there] was a multitude of people from all of Judea and Jerusalemn and from the sea-regions arbout Tyre and Sidon, that came to hear him and to be healed of their diseases. 18 Also [those] that were tormented by unclean spirits were being healed. 19 And the whole crowd sought to touch him, for power went out of him and healed all among them.

	20 Ar ortanes henduryat hilmoryannar ar quente: “Valime nar i penyar, an Eruo aranie ná *lenya!
	21 Valime nar elde i nar maite sí, an nauvalde quátine!
	Valime nar elde i nar yaimie, an laluvalde!
	22 Valima nalde íre atani tevir le, ar íre queriltexer lello ar naityar le ar et-hatir esselda ve ulca, i Atanyondo márien. 23 Sama alasse aure entasse ar capa, an yé! *paityalelda ná túra menelde. An tai nar i imye nati yar atariltar carner i Erutercánoin.

	20 And he raised his eyes towards his disciples and said: “Happy are the poor, for God's kingdom is yours!
	21 Happy are you that are hungry now, for you will be filled!
	Happy are you that are wailing, for you will laugh!
	22 Happy you are when men hate you, and when they turn from you and abuse you and throw out your name as evil, for the good of the Son of Man. 23 Have joy in that day and leap, for behold! your reward is great in heaven. For those are the same things that their fathers did to the prophets.

24 Mal horro len i nar lárie, an asámielde quanda tiutalelda!
25 Horro len i nar quátine sí, an nauvalde maite!
Horro len i lalar sí, an samuvalde nyére ar níri!
26 Horro len íre ilye atani quetir mai pa le, an mí imya lé atariltar quenter pa i úanwe Erutercánor!
27 Mal quétan lenna i lastar: Mela ñottoldar ar cara mai in tevir le, 28 á aista i hútar le ar hyama in quetir ulco pa le. 29 Yenna pete le er ventasse quera yú i exe, ar ye mapa collalya áva pusta mapávello yú i laupe.

24 But woe to you that are rich, for you have received your entire comfort!
25 Woe to you that are full now, for you will be hungry!
Woe to you that laugh now, for you will have grief and tears!
26 Woe to you when all men speak well of you, for in the same manner their fathers spoke about the false prophets!
27 But I say to you that listen: Love your enemies and do well to [those] that hate you, 28 bless [those] that curse you and pray for [those] who speak evil about you. 29 Towards [the one] that strikes you on one chin turn also the other, and [the one] that takes your cloak do not stop from taking also the tunic.

30 Á anta illin i arcar lyello, ar yello mapa natilyar áva arca *nancame tai.
	31 Ar ve merilde i atani caruvar len, sie cara tien.
	32 Ar qui melilde i melir lé, manen ta nauva aşea len? An yú i úcarindor melir i melir té. 33 Ar qui carilde márie in carir márie elden, manen ta nauva aşea len? Yú i úcarindor carir i imya. 34 Ar qui *yutyal queni illon samil estel camiéva, manen ta nauva aşea len? Yú úcarindor *yutyar úcarindor camien nan i imya nonwa. 35 Úsie, mela ñottoldar ar cara márie ar á *yutya exeli, ú estelo *nancamiéva, ar *paityalelda nauva túra, ar nauvalde i Antaro yondor, an sé ná aşea  in uar anta hantale ar i ulcain. 36 Á órava ve Atarelda órava!

30 Give to all that ask of you [sg], and from [the one] that takes your things, do not ask to receive them back.
	31 And as you [pl.] wish that men will do to you, so do to them.
	32 And if you love [those] that love you, how will that be beneficial for you? For also the sinners love [those] that love them. 33 And if you do good to [those] that do good to you, how will that be beneficial for you? Also the sinners do the same. 34 And if you lend to people from whom you have hope of receiving, how will that be beneficial to you? Also sinners lend to sinners in order to receive back the same sum. 35 On the contrary, love your enemies and do good and lend to others, without hope of receiving back, and your reward will be great, and you will be sons of the Most High, for he is kind to [those] who do not give thanks and to the evil ones. 36 Show mercy like your Father shows mercy!

37 Ente, áva name, ar laume nauvalde námine; áva quete i exi nar valde paimeo, ar ua nauva quétina pa lé i nalde valde paimeo. Á lehta, ar nauvalde lehtane. 38 Á anta, ar mo antauva len. Mára lesta – nírina undu, pálina ar úvea – panyuvalte súmaldasse. An i lestanen yanen *etelestalde, *etelestuvalte len. 
	39 Tá yú quentes sestie téna: “Lau laceníte quén pole tulya  laceníte quén? Ma yúyo uat lantuva mir unque? 40 Ye pare ua or ye peanta, mal ilquen yen anaie aqua peantana nauva ve ye peanta. 41 Manen ná, tá, i yétal i lisce ya ea hánolyo hendesse, mal ualye cime i pano ya ea véra hendelyasse? 42 Manen ece lyen quete hánolyanna: 'Háno, lava nin mapa i lisce et hendelyallo,' íre elye ua yéta i pano véra hendelyasse?

37 Furthermore, do not judge, and you will by no means be judged; do not say that others are worthy of punishment, and [it] will not be said about you that you are worthy of punishment. Release, and you will be released. 38 Give, and one will give to you. A good measure – pressed down, shaken and abundant – they will place in your bosom. For by the measure with which you measure out, they will measure out to you.
	39 Then he also spoke this comparison: “Surely a blind person cannot lead a blind person? Will not both fall into a hollow? 40 [He] who learns is not above [the one] who instructs, but everyone that has been fully instructed will be like [the one] who instructs. 41 How is [it], then, that you look at the straw which is in your brother's eye, but you do not heed the plank which is in your own eye? 42 How is it possible for you to say to your brother: 'Brother, allow me to take the straw out of your eye,' when you do not look at the plank in your own eye?

43 An lá ea mára alda carila şaura yáve; ata lá ea şaura alda carila mára yáve. 44 An ilya alda ná sinwa yáveryanen. An queni uar comya *rélyávi necelillon; ente, ualte cire *tiumar ho neceltussa. 45 Mára atan tala márie et endaryo mára harmallo, mal ulca atan tala ulco et ulca harmaryallo, an et i endo úvello antorya quete.
	46 Manen ná i estalde ni 'Heru, Heru', ananta ualde care i nati yar quetin? 47 Ilquen ye tule ninna ar hlare quettanyar ar care tai – tanuvan len as man mo pole sesta se: 48 Náse ve quén carastala coa, ye sampe ar panyane i talma i ondosse. Etta, íre enge oloire, i síre palpane sana coanna, mal uas polde pale sa, pan anes mai carastana. 49 Mal ye ahlárie ar ua care, ná ve nér ye carastane coa i talamesse ú talmo. Ana ta i síre pente, ar mí sana imya lú talantes, ar coa sano atalantie túra né.”

43 For [there] does not exist [any] good tree producing foul fruit; again [there] does not exist [any] foul tree producing good fruit. 44 For every tree is known by its fruit. For people do not gather figs from thorns; furthermore, they do not cut grapes from a thorn-bush. 45 A good man brings good out of his heart's hidden treasure, but an evil man brings evil out of his evil treasure, for out of the heart's abundance his mouth speaks.
	46 How is [it] that you call me 'Lord, Lord', and yet you do not do the things that I say? 47 Everyone who comes to me and hears my words and does them – I will show you with whom one can compare him: 48 He is like a person building a house, who dug and put the foundation upon the rock. Therefore, when [there] was flood, the river beat against that house, but it could not shake it, since it was well built.
	49 But [the one] who has heard and does not do, is like a man who built a house on the ground without a foundation. Against that the river beat, and in that same moment it collapsed, and the collapse of that house was great.”

RANTA 7
Apa telyanes ilye quetieryar íre i lie lastane, lendes mir Capernaum. 2 Mal *tuxanturo mól, ye náne melda sen, náne nimpa ar hare effírienna. 3 Íre hlasses pa Yésus, mentanes senna amyárali i Yúraron arcien sello tule ar etelehta mólya. 4 Tá i túler Yésunna carner arcande sello ar quenter: “Náse valda i caril nat sina sen, 5 an melis liendelva, ar isse carastane men i *yomencoa.” 6 Ar Yésus lende aselte. Mal íre únes haira i coallo, i *tuxantur nóvo mentane meldoli quetieltan senna: “Heru, áva tarce imle, an uan valda i tulil nu tópanya.

CHAPTER 7
After he completed all his sayings while the people listened, he went into Capernaum. 2 But the slave of a centurion, who was dear to him, was ailing and near to expiring. 3 When he heard about Jesus, he sent to him some elders of the Jews to request him to come and to deliver his slave. 4 Then [those] that came to Jesus made petition of him and said: “He is worthy that you do this thing for him, 5 for he loves our nation, and he built for us the synagoge.” 6 And Jesus went with them. But when he was not far from the house, the centurion beforehand sent some friends for them to say to him: “Lord, do not trouble yourself, for I am not worthy that you come under my roof.

7 Etta únen note imne valda tulien lyenna. Mal queta i quetta ar tyara mólinya náve nestana. 8 An yú inye nér nu túre ná, arwa ohtarion nu ni, ar qui quetin sinanna: Mena! – tá ménas, hya exenna: Tula! – tá tulis, hya mólinyanna: Cara sie! – tá caris ta.” 9 Ar íre Yésus hlasse nati sine anes quátina elmendanen pa se, ar quernes inse i şanganna hilyala se ar quente: “Nyarin len, yando Israelde uan ihírie savie ta túra.” 10 Ar i náner mentane, íre nanwennelte i coanna, hirner i mól málesse.

7 Therefore I did not count myself worthy to come to you. But say the word and cause my slave to be healed. 8 For I as well am a man under authority [túre = power], having soldiers under me, and if I say to this one: Go! – then he goes, or to another: Come! – then he comes, or to my slave: Do so! – then he does that.” 9 And when Jesus heard these things he was filled with wonder about him, and he turned [Q: turned himself] to the crowd following him and said: “I tell you, even in Israel I have not found a faith that great.” 10 And [the ones] that were sent, when they returned to the house, found the slave in health.

	11 Ar epeta martane i lendes mir osto estaina Nain, ar hildoryar ar hoa şanga lender óse. 12 Ar íre túles har i osto andonna, qualin nér náne cólina ettenna, amilleryo *ernóna yondo. Ente, verurya náne qualina. Hoa şanga i ostollo enge yú as i nís.

	11 And thereafter [it] happened that he went into a city called Nain, and his disciples and a great crowd went with him. 12 And when he came near to the gate of the city, a dead man was carried outside, the only-born son of his mother. Furthermore, her husband was dead. A great crowd from the city was also with the woman.

12 Ar íre i Heru cenne se, endarya etelende senna, ar quentes senna: “Áva na yaimea!” 13 Ar túlienwa har appanes i tulma, ar i colindor pustaner, ar quentes: “Nessa nér, quétan lyenna: Á orta!” 15 Ar i qualin nér hamne ama ar *yestane carpa, ar Yésus se-antane amilleryan. 16 Sí rucie nampe te illi, ar antanelte alcar Erun, quetila: “Túra Erutercáno anaie ortana ama mici ve,” ar: “Eru icímie lierya!” 17 Ar quetta sina vistane mir quanda Yúrea ar i quanda pelila nórienna. 
	18 Ar Yoháno hildor nyarner sen pa ilye nati sine. 19 Ar Yoháno yalde atta hildoryaron ar mentane tu i Herunna quetien: “Ma elye ná ye tulumne, hya ma mauya men yéta ompa exenna?” 20 Íre túlette senna, i neri quenter: “Yoháno i *Sumbando mentane met lyenna quetien: Ma elye ná ye tulumne, hya ma mauya men hope exen?”

12 And when the Lord saw her, his heart went out to her, and he said to her: “Do not be wailing!” 13 And having come near he touched the bier, and the bearers stopped, and he said: “Young man, I say to you: Rise!” 15 And the dead man sat up and started to talk, and Jesus gave him to his mother. 16 Now fear seized them all, and they gave glory to God, saying: “A great prophet has been raised up among us,” and: “God has heeded his people!” 17 And this word spread into all Judea and the whole surrounding country.
	18 And John's disciples told him about all these things. 19 And John called two of his disciples and sent them [tu, dual] to the Lord to say: “Are you [the one] that was going to come, or is it necessary for us to look forward to another?” 20 When they [-tte, dual] came to him, the men said: “John the Baptist sent us to you to say: Are you [the one] that was going to come, or is it necessary for us to wait for another?”

 21 Lúme yanasse nestanes rimbali, leryala te hlívellon ar perperiellon ar olce fairellon, ar rimbe *cénelóralin tyarnes *céne. 22 Ar hanquentes túna: “Á auta, nyara Yohánon ya cennette ar hlassette: I *cénelórar camir *céne, i helmahlaiwar nar poitaine ar i penner hlarie hlarir, i qualinar nar ortaine, ar valima ná ye ua hire nisse casta taltiéva.”
	24 Apa i neri mentaine lo Yoháno oanter, *yestanes carpa i şangannar pa Yoháno: “Mana lendelde mir i erume yétien? Lisce levila i şúrinen? 25 Lá, mana etelendelde cenien? Nér arwa mussi lannion? Yé, i arwar mussi lannion ear coassen araniva! 26 Mal mana castalda etelelien? Cenie Erutercáno? Ná, quétan lenna, ar ambela Erutercáno! 

21 In that hour he healed numerous ones, freeing them from illnesses and from sufferings and from wicked spirits, and many blind ones he caused to see. 22 And he answered them [túna, dual]: “Go away, tell John what you [dual] saw and heard: The blind receive sight, the skin-diseased are made clean and [those] that lacked hearing hear, the dead ones are raised, and happy is [the one] that does not find in me a cause for falling.”
	24 After the men send by John went away, he began to speak to the crowds about John: “What did you go into the desert to look at? A reed moving by the wind? 25 No, what did you go out to see? A man having soft clothes? Behold, those having soft clothes are in the houses of kings! 26 But what [was] your reason for going out? To see a prophet? Yes, I say to you, and much more than a prophet!

27 Sé náne pa ye anaie técina: 'Yé! Mentan tercánonya epe cendelelya, manwien mallelya epe lye.' 28 Nyarin len: Imíca i náner nóne lo nissi ea *úquen túra lá Yoháno, mal quén imíca i ambe pityar Eruo araniesse ná túra lá sé.” 29 Ar i quanda lie ar i *tungwemor, íre hlasselte ta, quenter i Eru náne faila, té nála *tumyaine Yoháno sumbiénen. Mal i Farisar ar i *şanyengolmor querner oa ya Eru merne tien, té i úner sumbane lo sé.
	31 “As man, tá, sestuvan *nónare sina? 32 Nalte ve hínar hamila mi mancanóme ar yamila quén i exenna: 'Tyaldelme i simpa len, mal ualde liltane; anelme yaimie, mal ualde sáme níri.' 33 An Yoháno i *Sumbando utúlie, lá matila massa hya sucila limpe, mal quetilde: 'Náse haryaina lo rauco!' 34 I Atanyondo utúlie, matila ar sucila, mal quetilde: 'Ela! Nér *accamatila ar antana sucien limpe, meldo *tungwemoron ar úcarindoron!' 35 Ananta sailie tanana faila ná lo ilye hínaryar.”

27 He was [the one] about whom it has been written: 'Behold! I send my herald before your face, to prepare your way before you.' 28 I tell you: Among [those] that were born of women [there] is no one greater than John, but a person among the smaller in God's kingdom is greater than he.” 29 And the whole people and the tax collectors, when they heard that, said that God was just, they being baptized with John's baptism. But the Pharisees and the lawyers turned away [that] which God wanted for them, they that were not baptized by him.
	31 “With whom, then, shall I compare this generation? 32 They are like children sitting in a market-place and crying one to the other: 'We played the flute for you, but you did not dance; we were wailing, but you did not have tears.' 33 For John the Baptist has come, not eating bread or drinking vine, but you say: He is possessed by a demon! 34 The Son of Man has come, eating and drinking, but you say: Look! A man over-eating and given to drinking vine, friend of tax collectors and sinners!' 35 And yet wisdom is shown [to be] just by all its children.”

	36 Quén imíca i Farisar arcane i Yésus matumne óse, ar tulila mir coa i Farisava cainunes ara i sarno. 37 Ar yé! nís ye náne sinwa i ostosse ve *úcarinde parne i enges ara i sarno coasse i Farisava, ar mancanes insen ondocolca níşima milleo, 38 ar tarila niessen ca Yésus ara taluryat, i nís *yestane care taluryat mixe nieryainen ar *aupsarne tai caryo findelénen, ar minques talyat ar *elpane tu i níşima millonen. 39 Cenila ta, i Farisa ye yalde Yésus quente insenna: “Nér sina, qui anes Erutercáno, istumne man ar mana nostaleo ná nís sina ye appea se – i náse *úcarinde!” 40 Mal hanquentasse Yésus quente senna: “Símon, samin nat ya merin quete lyenna.” Eques: “*Peantar, queta sa!”

	36 A person among the Pharisees requested that Jesus was to eat with him, and coming into the Pharisee's house he laid down by the table. 37 And behold! a woman who was known in the city as a sinner learnt that he was at the table in the house of the Pharisees, and she bought [lit. traded to herself] a stone-box of fragrant oil, 38 and standing in tears behind Jesus by his feet, the woman started to make his feet wet with her tears and wiped them off with the hair of her head, and she kissed his feet and annointed them with the fragrant oil. 39 Seeing that, the Pharisee who invited Jesus said to himself: “This man, if he was a prophet, would know who and of what kind is this woman that is touching him – that she is a sinner!” 40 But in answer Jesus said to him: “Simon, I have something that I want to say to you.” He said: “Teacher, say it!”

	41 “Nér atta sámet rohta quenen yello camnette telpe; er sáme rohta lenárion tuxar lempe, i exe, *lepenquean. 42 Íre sámelte munta antáven nan sen, yúyon apsennes. Tá man mici tú meluva se ambe?” 43 Hanquentasse Símon quente: “Intyan i quén yenen apsennes i anhoa nonwe.” Quentes senna: “Namnes mai.”
	44 Tá quernes inse i nissenna ar quente Símondenna: “Ma cénal nís sina? Túlen mir coalya; ual antane nin nén talunyant. Mal nís sina carne talunyat mixe níreryainen ar *aupsarne tai findeleryanen. 45 Ual antane nin mique, mal nís sina, i lúmello ya túlen, ua pustane mique talunyat. 46 Ual *líve carinya millonen, mal nís sina *líve talunyat níşima millonen. 47 Sina castanen quétan lyenna: Rímbe úcareryar nar apsénine sen, an méles ole; mal yen pitya ná apsénina, mele pityave.”

	“Two men had a debt to a person from whom they received money; one had a debt of five hundred denarii, the other, fifty. 42 When they had nothing to give back to him, he foregave both. Then who among them [tú, dual] will love him [the] more?” 43 In answer Simon said: “I suppose the person to whom he forgave the greatest sum.” He said to him: “You judged well.”
	44 Then he turned [Q: turned himself] to the woman and said to Simon: “Are you seeing this woman? I came into your house; you did not give me water for my feet. But this woman made my feet wet with her tears and wiped them away with her hair. 45 You did not give me [any] kiss, but this woman, from the hour that I came, did not cease to kiss my feet. 46 You did not anoint my head with oil, but this woman anointed my feet with fragrant oil. 47 For this reason I say to you: Her numerous sins are forgiven her, for she loved much; but [the one] to whom a little is forgiven, loves little.”

48 Tá quentes senna: “Úcarelyar nar apsénine.” 49 Mal i cainer óse as i sarno *yestaner quete intesse: “Man ná nér sina ye yando apsene úcari?” 50 Ono quentes i nissenna: “Savielya erehtie lye; mena rainesse.”

48 Then he said to her: “Your sins are forgiven.” 49 But those who lay with him at the table began to say in themselves: “Who is this man that even forgives sins?” But he said to the woman: “Your faith has saved you; go in peace.”

RANTA 8
Ar túle epeta i lendes ostollo ostonna ar mastollo mastonna ar peantane ar carne sinwa i evandilyon pa Eruo aranie, ar i yunque hilyaner se, ve carner nisseli i náner nestane olce fairellon ar hlívellon: María ye náne estaina Mahtaléne, yello raucor otso náner ettúlienwe, 3 ar Yoanna verirya Cúsa, Herolo cáno, ar Susanna ar rimbe hyane nisseli, i *veuyaner sen armaltainen.
	4 Sí íre hoa şanga náne ocómienwa as i lender óse ostollo ostonna, quentes téna sestiénen: 5 “*Rerindo etelende rerien. Rerieryasse erdeli lantaner ara i malle ar náner *vattane undu, ar menelo aiwi manter tai. 

CHAPTER 8
And it happened [lit. came] thereafter that he went from city to city and from village to vilalge and taught and made known the gospel about God's kingdom, and the twelve followed him, as did some women that were healed from wicked spirit and illneses: Mary who was called Magdalene, from whom seven demons had gone out, 3 and Joanna the wife of Cuza, Herod's commander, and Susanna and numerous other women, who served him with their goods.
	4 Now when a great crowd had gathered with [those] that went with him from city to city, he said to them in a comparison: 5 “A sower went out to sow. In his sowing some seeds fell beside the road and were trampled down, and the birds of heaven ate them. 

6 Exeli lantaner i ondonna, ar apa tuianelte hestanelte, peniénen nén. 7 Exeli lantaner imíca i neceli, ar i neceli i aller ama aselte quorner te. 8 Exeli lantaner i mára cemenna, ar apa tuianelte carnelte yáve, napánine lestar túxa.” Apa nyarie nati sine, yámes: “Nai ye same hlaru hlaruva!”
	9 Mal hildoryar maquenter senna: “Mana tea i sestie?” 10 Eques: “Elden ná antana ista Eruo araniéno fóler, mal i exin nás sestiessen, tyarila te yéta pen cenie ar hlare pen hanie. 11 Si ná ya tea i sestie: I erde Eruo quetta ná. 12 I nar ara i malle nar i ahlárier; tá i Arauco tule ar mapa oa i quetta endaltallo, pustien te saviello ar návello rehtane.

6 Others fell upon the rock, and after they sprouted they withered, for lacking water. 7 Others fell among the thorns, and the thorns that grew up with them choked them. 8 Others fell upon the good soil, and after they sprouted they made fruit, a hundred added measures.” After telling these things, he cried: “May [the one] that has ears hear!”
	9 But his disciples asked him: “What does the comparison mean?” 10 He said: “To you [it] is given to know the secrets of God's kingdom, but to the others it is in comparisons, causing them to look without seeing and hear without understanding. 11 This is what the comparison means: The seed is God's word. 12 [The ones] that are beside the road are [the ones] that have heard; then the Devil comes and takes away the word from their heart, to stop them from believing and from being saved.

13 I nar i ondosse nar i camir i quetta alassenen íre hlariltes, mal té uar same şundo; savilte ter lúme, mal lúmesse tyastiéno lantalte oa. 14 I lantaner imíca i neceli, té nar i ahlárier, mal nála cóline oa coive sino querelínen ar larnen ar alassínen, nalte quórine ar telyar munta. 15 Mal i nar i mára cemesse, té nar i hlarir i quetta mára ar vanya endanen ar hepir sa ar colir yáve voronwiénen.
	16 Ea *úquen ye nartiéla calma tupe sa venenen hya panya sa nu caima, mal sa-panyas i calmatarmasse, lavila in tulir minna yéta i cala. 17 An ea munta nurtana ya ua nauva apantana, hya erya nat halyana ya ua oi nauva sinwa hya aşcénima.

13 [The ones] that are on the rock are [those] that receive the word with joy when they hear it, but they do not have [any] root; they believe for [ter = through] a time, but in a time of testing they fall away. 14 [Those] that fell among the thorns, they are [the ones] that have heard, but being carried away by the anxieties of this life and by riches and by joys, they are choked and complete nothing. 15 But [the ones] that are on the good soil, they are [the ones] that hear the word with a good and beautiful heard and keep it and make fruit by steadfastness.
	16 [There] is no one who having kindled a lamp covers it with a vessel or puts it under a bed, but he puts it on the lampstand, allowing [the ones] that come inside to look at the light. 17 And [there] is nothing hidden that will not be revealed, or a single thing veiled that will not ever be known or easily seen.

18 Etta cima manen lastalde, an aiquen ye same, amba nauva antana sen, mal aiquen ye ua same, yú ya savis i samis nauva mapana sello.”
	19 Sí amillerya ar hánoryar túler senna, mal ualte polde rahta senna i şanganen. 20 Mal queni nyarner sen: “Amillelya ar hánoldar tárar i ettesse, merila vele lye.” 21 Hanquentasse quentes téna: “Amillinya ar hánonyar nr i hlarir Eruo quetta ar carir sa.”
	22 Túle mi er i aurion in isse ar hildoryar lender mir lunte, ar quentes téna: “Alve lahta i hyana fáranna i ailino.” Sie cirnelte oa. 23 Mal íre cirnelte fumnes. Sí raumo lantane i ailinna, ar luntelta náne quátina, ar anelte raxesse. 24 I mettasse lendelte senna ar eccoitaner se, quetila: “*Peantar, *peantar, quálalme!” Mal ortiéla naicines i şúre ar i neno orme, ar anelte cárine sende, ar enge quilde. 

18 Therefore take heed how you listen, for anyone who has, more will be given to him, but anyone who does not have, also [that] which he believes he has will be taken from him.”
	19 Now his mother and his brothers came to him, but they could not reach to him because of the crowd. 20 But people told him: “Your mother and your brothers are standing on the outside, wishing to see [or, meet] you.” 21 In answer he said to them: “My mother and my brothers are [those] who hear God's word and do it.”
	22 It happened [lit. came] in one of the days that he and his disciples went into a boat, and he said to them: “Let us pass over to the other shore of the lake.” Thus they sailed away. 23 But while they sailed he slept. Now a storm fell upon the lake, and their boat was filled, and they were in danger. 24 In the end they went to him and woke him up, saying: “Teacher, teacher, we are dying!” But after rising he rebuked the wind and the violence of the water, and they were made [to be] at rest, and [there] was a silence.

25 Tá quentes téna: “Masse savielda?” Mal nála ruhtane anelte elmendasse, quetila quén i exenna: “É man ná nér sina, an canis yando i şúrin ar i nenen, ar carilte ve quetis?” 
	26 Ar cirnelte nórienna Erasenyaiva, ya caita i hyana hrestasse Alileallo. 27 Ar íre lendes norenna, se-velde nér i ostollo ye náne haryaina lo rauco; ter anda lúme uas colle lanni, ar uas marne coasse, mal imíca i noiri. 28 Íre cennes Yesus, yámes ar lantane undu epe se, ar quentes taura ómanen: “Mana nin ar lyen, Yésus, Eru Antaro yondo? Iquin lyello, ávani ñwalya!' 29 An cannes i úpoica fairen tule et i nerello. Nóvo i rauco ter anda lúme hempe i nér tanca, ar anes nútina limilínen ar nútínen taluryatse, lan cundor tirner se, mal narcanes i núti ar náne élina lo i rauco mir i erinque nómi.

25 Then he said to them: “Where [is] your faith?” But being scared they were in wonder, saying one to the other: “Who indeed is this man, for he commands also [or, even] the winds and the water, and they do as he says?”
	26 And they sailed to [the] country of the Gerasenes, which lies on the other shore from Galilee. 27 And when he went on land, [there] met him a man from the city who was possessed by a a demon; for [ter, 'through'] a long time he did not bear clothes, and he did not dwell in a house, but among the tombs. 28 When he saw Jesus, he cried [out] and fell down before him, and he said in a mighty voice: “What [is there] for me and for you [= what do you have to do with me], Jesus, son of the Most High God? I beg of you, to not torment me!” 29 For he commanded the unclean spirit to come out of the man. Beforehand the demon for a long time kept the man fast, and he was bound by chains and by bonds on his feet, while guards watched him, but he tore over the bonds and was driven by the demon into the lonely places.

30 Yésus maquente senna: “Mana esselya?” Eques: “Lehion,” an rimbe raucoli náner ménienwe mir se. 31 Ar arcanelte sello i ávas mentumne te mir i undume. 32 Mal enge tasse hoa lámáre polcaiva nesselesse mí oron, ar arcandelte sello i lavumnes tien auta mir té. Ar láves tien. 32 Tá i raucor etelender et i nerello ar menner mir i polcar, ar i lámáre lende rimpa olla i lanca mir i ailin ar quorner. 34 Mal íre i mavari cenner ya náne martienwa, úşelte ar nyarner sa i ostosse ar i restassen.
	35 Tá queni ettúler cenien ya martienwa né, ar túlelte Yésunna ar hirne i nér yello i raucor náner ettúlienwe, colila lanneli ar málesse sámo, hamila ara Yésuo talu, ar anelte ruhtane. 

30 Jesus asked him: “What is your name?” He said, “Legion,” for numerous demons had gone into him. 31 And they requested of him that he would not send them into the abyss. 32 But [there] was there a great flock of swine on pasture in the mountain, and they requested of him that he would allow them to pass into them. And he allowed them. 32 Then the demons went out of the man and went into the swine, and the flock went rushing over the edge into the lake and drowned. 34 But when the herders saw [that] which had happened, they fled and told it in the city and in the fields. 
	35 Then people came out to see [that] which had happened, and they came to Jesus and found the man from whom the demons had come out, bearing clothes and in health of mind, sitting by Jesus' feet, and they were terrified.

36 I cenner sa nyarner tien manen i raucoharyaina nér náne rehtana. 37 Ar i quanda liyúme i pelila nóriello Erasenyaiva arcaner sello auta tello, an anelte mapane túra ruciénen. Tá lendes mir i lunte ar cirne oa. 38 Ono i nér et yello i raucor náner túlienwe inque i lavuvas sen lemya óse. Mal mentanes i nér oa, quetila: 39 “Nanwena maralyanna, ar nyara pa i nati yar Eru acárie lyen.” Ar lendes oa ter i quanda osto, carila sinwa ilqua ya Yésus carne sen.
	40 Íre Yésus nanwenne, anes cámina lo i şanga, an illi *lartaner sen. 41 Mal yé! nér estaina Yairo túle, ar sé náne i turco i *yomencavo. Ar lantanes undu epe Yésuo occat ar arcane sello i tulumnes coaryanna, 42 an enge óse yelde, erya hínarya, ye sáme *os loar yunque, ar sé náne hare qualmenna. 

36 [Those] that saw it told to them how the demon-possessed man was saved. 37 And the whole multitude from thesurrounding country of [the] Gerasenes requested of him to go away from them, for they were seized by great fear. Then he went into the boat and sailed away. 38 But the man out of whom the demons were come begged that he would [Q: will] allow him to remain with him. But he sent the man away, saying: 39 “Return to your home, and tell about the things that God has done for you.” And he went away through the entire city, making known everything that Jesus did for him.
	40 When Jesus returned [i.e. to where he had come from], he was received by the crowd, for all waited for him. 41 But behold! a man called Jairus came, and he was the chief of the synagogue. And he fell down before Jesus' knees [occat, dual] and requested of him that he would come to his house, 42 for [there] was with him a daughter, his only child, who had [an age of] about twelve years, and she near to death.

Íre Yésus náne malleryasse, i şangar ninder senna. 43 Ar nís, ye ter loar yunque perpére celuménen serceva, yen ua ence ñete nestie ho aiquen, 44 túle ca se ar appane collaryo lane, ar mí imya lú i celume serceva pustane. 45 Ar eque Yésus: “Man náne ye appane ni?” Íre illi laquenter sa, Péter quente: “*Peantar, i şangar lumnar lyen ar nírar lyenna.” 46 Ananta Yésus quente: “Quén appane ni, an túnen manen níre lende et nillo.” 47 Cenila in uas úşe tuntie, i nís túle palila ar lantane undu epe se ar nyarne epe i quanda lie i casta yanen appanes Yésus ar manen anes nestana mí imya lú. 48 Mal Yésus quente senna: “Yelde, savielya erehtie lye; á auta rainesse!”

When Jesus was on his way, the crowds pressed against him. 43 And a woman, who for [ter = through] twelve years suffered from [-nen] a flood of blood, for whom it was not possible to get healing from anyone, 44 came behind him and touched the rim of his cloak, and in the same moment the flood of blood stopped. 45 And Jesus said: “Who was [the one] that touched me?” When all denied it, Peter said: “Teacher, the crowds lie heavily on you and are pressing against you.” 46 And yet Jesus said: “A person touched me, for I perceived how force went out of me.” 47 Seeing that she did not escape notice, the woman came trembling and fell down before him and told before the whole people the reason why [yanen = by which] she touched Jesus and how she was healed in the same moment. 48 But Jesus said to her: “Daughter, your faith has saved you; go away in peace!”

	49 Íre en quentes, nér túle coallo i turcova i *yomencavo, quetila: “Yeldelya aquálie. Áva tarce i *peantar ambe.” 50 Mal hlarila ta, Yésus hanquente senna: “Áva ruce; rie sava, ar nauvas rehtana.” 51 Íre túles i coanna uas láve aiquenen lelya minna, hequa Péteren ar Yohánon ar Yácoven ar i vendeo atar yo amillen. 52 Mal queni náner yaimie ar palpaner inte nairesse pa i vende. Ar eques: “Áva na yaimie, an uas qualle, mal nas lorna.” 53 Tá landelte senna, pan sintelte i náse qualina. 54 Mal nampes márya ar yáme, quetila: “Vende, á orta!” 55 Ar fairerya nanwenne, ar orontes mí imya lú, ar Yésus canne i mo antane sen nat matien. 56 Ar nostaryat nánet ara *intu; mal peantanes tún i ávatte nyare aiquenen pa ya náne martienwa. Til hit

	49 While he still spoke, a man came from [the] house of the chief of the synagogue, saying: “Your daughter has died. Do not trouble the teacher [any]more.” 50 But hearing that, Jesus answered him: “Do not be afraid; only believe, and she will be saved.” 51 When he came to the house he did not allow anyone to go inside, except Peter and John and Jacob and the maiden's father and mother. 52 But people were wailing and beat themselves in grief about the maiden. And he said: “Do not be wailing, for she did not die, but she is asleep.” 53 Then they laughed at him, since they knew that she was  [Q: is] dead. 54 But he took her hand and cried [out], saying: “Maiden, rise!” 55 And her spirit returned, and she arose in the same moment, and Jesus commanded that one gave her something to eat. 56 And her parents were beside themselves; but he instructed them that they were not to tell anyone about [that] which had happened.

RANTA 9
Tá tultanes i yunque ar antane tien turie ar túre or ilye i raucor, ar láve tien nesta hlívi. 2 Ar te-mentanes carien sinwa Eruo aranie ar nestien, 3 ar quentes téna: “Cola munta i lendan – lá vandil hya poco, lá masta hya telpe, ar áva tala laupe atta.

CHAPTER 9
Then he summoned the twelve and gave them control and power over all the demonds, and allowed them to heal diseases. 2 And he sent them to make known God's kingdom and to heal, 3 and he said to them: “Carry nothing for the journey – not staff or bag, not bread or money, and do not bring two tunics.

4 Mal íre lelyalde mir coa, á lemya tasse ar á auta talo. 5 Ar mi ilya nóme yasse queni uar cime le, íre autalde sana ostollo á pale i asto taluldalto ve *vettie tien.” 6 Tá, etelelyala, lendelte ter i ména mastollo mastonna, carila sinwa i evandilyon ar nestala queni ilya nómesse.
	7 Sí Herol i *canastatur hlasse pa ilqua ya martane, ar anes rúcina, pan náne quétina lo ennoli i Yoháno anaie ortana et qualinallon, 8 mal lo exeli i Elía utúlie, mal lo exeli in er imíca i enwine Erutercánor anaie ortana. 9 Eque Herol: “Yoháno cas aucirnen. Man, tá, ná quén sina pa ye hlarin taiti nati?” Ar cestanes velitas.

4 But when you go into a house, remain there and go away from there. 5 For in every place where people do not heed you, when you go away from that city shake the dust from your feet [dual] as a witness to them.” 6 Then, going out, they went though the region from village to village, making known the gospel and healing people in every place.
	7 Now Herod the farthing-ruler heard about everything that happened, and he was confused, since [it] was said by some that John was raised out of [the] dead, 8 but by others that Eliah had [Q: has] come, but by others that one among the ancient Prophets had [Q: has] been raised. 9 Herod said: “John's head I cut off. Who, then, is this person of whom I hear such things?” And he sought to see him.
	
	10 Ar íre i aposteli nanwenner nyarnelte Yésun pa ilye cardaltar. Tá talleset ar lende eressea nómenna, ara osto estaina Vet-Saira.  11 Mal i şangar, istala yanna lendes, hilyaner se. Ar camneset ar carampe téna pa Eruo aranie, ar nestanes i sámer maure nestiéva. 12 Tá, íre i aure náne fifírula, i yunque túler senna ar quenter senna: “Á menta i şanga oa, menieltan mir i mastor ar restar *os vi, hirien nóme lemien ar matso, an sisse nalve eressea nómesse.” 13 Mal quentes téna: “Elde áten anta nat matien.” Quentelte: “Ualme same amba lá mastar lempe ar lingwe atta, qui lá cé menuvalme ar mancuvalme immen matso ilye sine quenin.” 14 An anelte *os neri húmi lempe. Mal quentes hildoryannar: “Tyara te caita undu mi hostar queniva *os *lepenquean mi ilya hosta.” 15 Ar carnelte sie ar tyarne te illi caita undu. 16 Tá nampes i mastar lempe ar lingwe atta ar yente mir menel, aistane tai ar rance tai, ar antanes tai i hildoin panien tai epe i şanga. 17 Ar illi manter ar náner quátine, ar i lemyala rantar yar hostanelte quanter *vircolcar yunque.

10 And when the apostles returned they told Jesus about all their deeds. Then he brought them and went to a lonely place, by a city called Bethsaida. 11 But the crowds, knowing whither he went, followed him. And he received them and talked to them about God's kingdom, and he healed [those] who had need of healing. 12 Then, when the day was fading, the twelve came to him and said to him: “Send the crowd away, for them to go into the villages and fields around us, to find a place to remain and food, for here we are in a lonely place.” 13 But he said to them: “You give them something to eat.” They said: “We do not have more than five breads and two fish, if perhaps we are not to go and trade to ourselves [= buy] food for all these people.” 14 For they were around five thousand people. But he said to his disciples: “Make them lie down in groups of people around fifty in each group.” 15 And they did so and made them all lie down. 16 Then he took the five breads and two fish and looked into heaven, blessed them and broke them, and he gave them to the disciples to put them before the crowd. 17 And all ate and were filled, and the remaining pieces that they gathered filled twelve baskets.

	18 Ar túle, íre hyamnes nála erinqua, i ocomner senna i hildor, ar maquentes téna sie: “Man i şangar quetir i nanye?” 19 Hanquentasse quentelte: “Yoháno i *Sumbando; hya exeli, Elía, hya exeli: i er i enwine Erutercánoron orórie.” 20 Tá quentes téna: “Mal elde, man quetilde i nanye?” Hanquentasse eque Peter: “Eruo Hristo!” 21 Tá mi naraca quetie peantanes tien i ávalte quetumne sie aiquenna, 22 mal eques: “Mauya i Atanyondon mene ter rimbe perperiéli ar náve *auquerna lo i amyárar ar hére *airimor and parmagolmor, ar náve nanca, ar i neldea auresse nauvas ortana ama.”

	18 And it happened [lit. came], when he prayed being alone, that the disciples assembled to him, and he asked them so: “Who do the crowds say that I am?” 19 In answer they said: “John the Baptist; or others: Elijah, or others: that one of the ancient prophets has risen.” 20 Then he said to them: “But you, who do you say that I am?” In answer Peter said: “God's Christ!” 21 Then in harsh speech he instructed them that they were not to say so to anyone, 22 but he said: “It is necessary for the Son of Man to go through many sufferings and to be rejected [auquerna, turned away] the elders and chief priests and scribes, and to be slain, and on the third day he will be raised up.”

23 Tá quentes: “Qui aiquen mere tule apa ni, mauya sen váquete insen ar orta tarwerya ilya auresse ar hilya ní. 24 An aiquen ye mere rehta cuilerya, sen nauvas vanwa, mal aiquen yeo cuile ná vanwa márienyan, sé rehtuva sa. 25 É manen ná aşea atanen qui ñetis i quanda mar, mal véra quenerya ná sen vanwa hya nancarna? 26 An aiquen ye ná *naityana inyenen ar quettanyanen, sénen i Atanyondo nauva *naityana íre tuluvas alcareryasse ar mí Ataro ar i airi valion alcar. 27 Mal quetin lenna nanwiesse: Ear ennoli i tarir sisse i uar tyavuva qualme nó cenuvalte Eruo aranie.”

23 Then he said: “If anyone wants to come after me, it is necessary for him to deny himself and lift [up] his cross every day and follow me. 24 For anyone who wishes to save his life, to him it will be lost, but anyone whose life is lost for my good, he will save it. 25 Indeed how is [it] beneficial to a man if he obtains the whole world, but his own person is lost or destroyed to him? 26 For anyone who is ashamed over [-nen] me and over my word, over him the Son of Man will be ashamed when he shall come in his glory and in the Father's and the holy angels' glory. 27 But I say to you in truth: [There] are some that stand here that will not taste death before they will see God's kingdom.”

	28 Túle apa quettar sine, apa auri tolto, i talles Péter ar Yoháno ar Yácov ar lende ama mir i oron hyamien. 29 Ar hyamieryasse cendeleryo ilce ahyane, ar lanneryar mirilyaner ninquissenen. 30 Ar yé! nér atta carampet óse, yet nánet Móses ar Elía. 31 Tannette *intu alcaresse ar quenter pa i autie ya telyumnes Yerúsalemesse. 32 Ono Péter ar i enger óse náner lunge húmenen; mal apa coivie cennelte alcarerya ar i nér atta tára óse. 33 Ar íre tú oantet sello, Péter quente Yésunna: “*Peantar, mára ná i nalme sisse. Etta alme orta *lancoar nelde, er elyen ar er Mósen ar er Elían” – an uas sinte ya quentes. 34 Mal íre quentes nati sine enge lumbo ya teltane te, ar anelte ruhtaine íre mennelte mir i lumbo. 35 Ar óma túle et i lumbullo, quetila: “Si ná yondonya, ye anaie cílina. Á lasta senna!” 36 Ar apa i óma túle, Yésus náne hírina erinqua. Mal anelte quilde ar uar nyarne aiquenen yane auressen pa i nati yar cennelte.

	28 It happened [lit. came] after these words, after eight days, that he brought Peter and John and Jacob and went up into the mountain to pray. 29 And as he was praying [lit. in his praying] the appearance of his face changed, and his clothes glittered with whiteness. 30 And behold! two men talked with him, who were Moses and Elijah. 31 They showed themselves [dual] in glory and spoke about the going away that he was to complete in Jerusalem. 32 But Peter and those that were with him were heavy with sleep; but after awakening they saw his glory and the two men standing with him. 33 And when they [dual] went away from him, Peter said to Jesus: “Teacher, it is good that we are here. Therefore let us erect [orta = raise] three tents, one for you and one for Moses and one for Elijah” – for he did not know what he said. 34 But when he said these things [there] was a cloud that overshadowed them, and they were terrified when they went into the cloud. 35 And a voice came out of the cloud, saying: “This is my son, who has been chosen. Listen to him!” 36 And after the voice came, Jesus was found [to be] alone. But they were silent and did not tell anyone in those days about the things that they saw.

37 I hilyala auresse, íre túlelte undu i orontello, hoa şanga velle se. 38 Ar yé! nér yáme et i şangallo, quetila: “*Peantear, iquin lyello i cenil yondonyanna, an náse erya hínanya, 39 ar yé! rauco mapa se, ar rincenen yamis, ar tyarises rihta ar falasta, ar urdave autas sello apa harnie se. 40 Ar inquen hildolyallon i et-hatumner i rauco, mal ua ence tien.” 41 Hanquentasse Yésus quente: “A úvoronda ar rícina *nónare, manen andave mauyuva nin lemya aselde ar cole le? Á tulya yondolya sir!” 42 Mal íre hé en túlane har, i rauco hante he i talamenna ar tyarne he rihta. Ono Yésus naicine i úpoica faire ar nestane i seldo ar se-antane ataryan. 43 Ar illi tatallaner pa Eruo meletya túre.

37 On the following day, when they came down from the mountain, a big crowd met him. 38 And behold! a man cried out of the crowd, saying: “Teacher, I beg of you that you see to my son, for he is my only child, 39 and behold! a demon seizes him, and suddenly [rincenen: with a sudden twist] he cries [out], and it causes him to twitch and foam, and it hardly goes away from him after wounding him. 40 And I begged of your disciples that they would expel the demon, but [it] was not possible for them.” 41 In answer Jesus said: “O unfaithful and twisted generation, how long will it be necessary for me to remain with you and to bear you? Lead your son hither!” 42 But when that one was still coming near, the demon threw him to the ground and caused him to twitch. But Jesus rebuked the unclean spirit and healed the boy and gave him to his father. 43 And all marvelled about God's majestic power.

	Sí íre anelte mapaine elmendanen pa ilye i nati yar carnes, quentes hildoryannar: 44 “Oi hepa quettar sine sámasse, an i Atanyondo nauva antana olla mannar atanion.” 45 Mal ualte hanyane quetie sina; anes nurtaina tello, pustien te tuntiello mana tenges, ar runcelte maquetiello senna pa quetie sina.
	46 Tá enge cos mici te pa man náne i antúra mici te. 47 Yésus, istala manen sannelte endaltasse, nampe hína ar panyane se ara inse 48 ar quente téna: “Aiquen ye came hína sina essenyasse came ní, ar aiquen ye came ní came ye ni-mentane. I ampitya mici le ná i antúra.” 
	49 Hanquentasse eque Yoháno: “*Peantar, cennelme nér et-háta raucor esselyanen, ar névelme pusta se, pan únes aselme.” 50 Mal Yésus quente senna: “Ávase pusta, an ye ua tare lenna ná elden!”

	Now when they were seized by wonder about all the things that he did, he said to his disciples: 44 “Always keep these words in mind, for the Son of Man will be given over into the hands of men.” 45 But they did not understand this saying; it was being hidden from them, to stop them for perceiving what it meant, and they were afraid to ask [Q: feared from asking] him about this saying. 
	46 Then [there] was a strife among them about who was the greatest among them. 47 Jesus, knowing how they thought in their heart, took a child and put it next to himself 48 and said to them: “Anyone who receives this child in my name receives me, and anyone who receives me receives the one who sent me. The smallest [one] among you is the greatest.”
	49 In answer John said: “Teacher, we saw a man expelling demons by your name, and we tried to stop him, since he was not with us.” 50 But Jeus said to him: “Do not stop him, for [he] that does not stand against you is for you!”

51 Sí íre i lúme túle har náveryan cámina ama, quernes cendelerya Yerúsalemanna menien tar. 52 Mentanes tercánoli epe inse, ar oantelte ar lender mir masto Samáreaiva, manwien sen. 53 Mal ualte merne camitas, pan anes malleryasse Yerúsalemenna. 54 Íre i hildor Yácov yo Yoháno cennet ta, quentette: “Heru, ma meril i canuvalve náren tule undu menello nancarien te?” 55 Mal quernes inse ar tu-naityane. 56 Tá lendelte hyana mastonna.

51 Now when the time came near for his being received up, he turned his face towards Jerusalem to go there. 52 He sent heralds before himself, and they went away and went into a village of [the] Samaritans, to prepare for him. 53 But they did not want to receive him, since he was on his way to Jerusalem. 54 When the disciples Jacob and John saw [dual] that, they [dual] said: “Lord, do you wish that we are to command fire to come down from heaven to destroy them?” 55 But he turned himself and rebuked them [dual]. 56 Then he went away to another village.

57 Íre lendelte i mallesse quén quente senna: “Hilyuvan lye ilya nómenna yanna autal.” 58 Ar Yésus quente senna: “Rusqui samir eccar ar menelo aiwi samir *haustar, mal i Atanyondo ua same nóme panien carya.” 

57 When they went on the way a person said to him: “I will follow you to every place that you go away to.” 58 And Jesus said to him: “Foxes have holes [or, dens/lairs] and the birds of heaven have nests, but the Son of Man does not have [any] place to put his head.”

59 Tá quentes hyana nerenna: “Áni hilya!” I nér quente: “Lava nin minyave auta ar tala atarinya i sapsanna.” 60 Mal quentes senna: “Lava qualinain tala qualinaltar i sapsanna, mal elye mena ar cara menelo aranie sinwa!” 61 Ar exe quente: “Hilyuvan lye, Heru, mal minyave lava nin quete namárie innar ear coanyasse.” 62 Ono Yésus quente senna: “*Úquén ye apánie márya i hyaresse ar yéta i nati yar caita ca se, ná mára Eruo aranien. 

59 Then he said to another man: “Follow me!” The man said: “Allow me first to go away and bring my father to the grave.” 60 But he said to him: “Let [the] dead bring their dead to the grave, but you go and make the kingdom of heaven known!” 61 And another said: “I will follow you, Lord, but first let me say farewell to [those] that are in my house.” 62 But Jesus said to him: “Nobody who has put his hand on the plough and looks at the things that lie behind him, is fit for God's kingdom.”

RANTA 10
Apa nati sine i Heru cille exi *otoquean ar etementane te atta ar atta epe inse, ilya mastonna yanna sé immo tulumne. 2 Quentes téna: “I yavie ná úvea, mal i molir nar mance. Etta á arca i yaviéno Herullo, mentieryan queni hostien yavierya. 3 Á etelelya! Yé! Mentan le ve euler mici ñarmor. 4 Áva cole *pocolle, hya poco matson, hya hyapat; ar áva *suila aiquen i mallesse. 5 Íre tulilde mir coa, minyave queta: 'Nai coa sina samuva raine!' 6 Ar qui ea tasse meldo raineo, rainelda seruva senna. Mal qui ua ea er, nanwenuvas lenna. 7 Etta á lemya coa tanasse, matila ar sucila i nati yar antalte len, an ye mole ná valda *paityaleryo. Áva leve coallo coanna.
	8 Ente, íre menilde mir osto ar camilde le, mata i nati panyaine epe le, 9 ar á nesta i hlaiwar sasse, ar nyara tien: 'Eruo aranie utúlie har lenna.' 10 Mal quiquie tulilde mir osto ar ualte came le, mena mir palle malleryar ar queta: 11 'Yando i asto ya himyane talulmanta ostoldallo palalme oa lenna. Ono nat sina alde ista, in Eruo aranie utúlie har!' 12 Nyáran lenna: Soromen i aure namiéva nauva *cólima lá ya nauvas sana oston.

CHAPTER 10
After these things the Lord chose seventy others and sent them forth two and two before himself, to every village that he himself would come to. 2 He said to them: “The harvest is abundant, but those who work are few. Therefore ask of the Lord of the harvest, for him to send people to gather his harvest. 3 Go out! Behold! I send you like lambs among wolves. 4 Do not carry a pouch, or a bag for food, or a pair of shoes; and do not greet anyone on the road. 5 When you come into a house, first say: 'May this house have peace!' 6 And if [there] is there a friend of peace, your peace will rest upon him. But if [there] is not one, it will return to you. 7 Therefore remain in that house, eating and drinking the things that they give you, for [he] who works is worthy of his reward. Do not move from house to house. 
	8 Furthermore, when you go into a city and they receive you, eat the things put before you, 9 and heal the sick ones in it, and tell them: 'God's kingdom has come near to you.' 10 But whenever you come into a city and they do not receive you, go into their broad ways and say: 11 'Also [/even] the dust which stuck to our feet [dual] from your city we shake away to you. But this thing you are to know, that God's kingdom has come near!' I am telling you: To Sodom the day of judgement will be more bearable than what it will be to that city.

	13 Horro lyen, Corasin! Horro lyen, Vet-Saira! An au i taure cardar yar amartier letse martaner mi Tír ar Síron, andanéya hirnelte inwis, hamila mi findianne ar *litte. 14 Etta Tíren ar Síronen i namie nauva *cólima lá lent! 15 Ar elye, Capernaum, ma cé nauval ortana menelenna? Undu Mandostonna tuluval! 
	16 Ye lasta lenna lasta ninna. Ar ye loita cime lé, loita cime ní. Ente, ye loita cime ní, loita cime ye ni-mentane.”
	17 Tá i *otoquean nanwenner mi alasse, quetila: “Heru, yando i raucoin mauya cime canwalmar mi esselya!” 18 Tá quentes téna: “Cennen Sátan lantienwa ve íta et menello. 19 Yé! Ánien len i túre *vettien nu taluldat leucar ar *nastaror ar i quanda melehte i ñottova, ar munta pole harna le. 20 Mal áva same alasse pa turielda or i raucor, mal sama alasse pan esseldar anaier técine menelde.”

	13 Woe to you, Chorazin! Woe to you, Bethsaida! For if the mighty deeds that have happened in you [dual] happened in Tyre and Sidon, long ago they found repentence, sitting in sack and ash. 14 Therefore for Tyre and to Sodom the judgement will be more bearable than for you! [dual] 15 And you, Capernaum, will you perhaps be raised up to heaven? Down to Mandos [Hades] you will come!
	16 [He] who listens to you listens to me. And [he] who fails to heed you, fails to heed me. Therefore, [he] who fails to heed me, fails to heed [the one] who sent me.”
	17 Then the seventy returned with [lit. in] joy, saying: “Lord, also [/even] for the demons it is necessary to heed our orders in your name!”  18 Then he said to them: “I saw Satan fallen like a flash out of heaven. 19 Behold! I have given you the power to trample under your feet serpents and scorpions and the entire might of the enemy, and nothing can wound you. But do not have joy about your control over the demons, but have joy since your names have been written in heaven.”

 21 Lúme yanasse anes anvalima i Aire Feanen ar quente: “Laitan tye, Atar, Heru or menel cemenye, an unurtiel nati sine sailallon ar handallon, ar ápantiel tai lapsin. Ná, Átar, an carie sie náne mára hendulyatse. 22 Ilye nati anaier antaine olla nin lo Atarinya, ar man i Yondo ná *úquen ista hequa i Atar, ar man i Atar ná, *úquen ista hequa i Yondo, ar aiquen yen i Yondo mere apanta se.”
	23 Ar apa querie inse i hildonnar quentes: “Valime nát i hendu yat yétat yar elde yétar. 24 An quetin lenna: Rimbe Erutercánoli ar aralli merner cene i nati yar elde yétar, mal ualte cenne tai, ar hlare i nati yar elde hlarir, mal ualte hlasse tai.”

21 At that time he was most happy by the Holy Spirit and said: “I praise you, Father, Lord over heaven and earth, for you have hidden these things from wise ones and from intelligent ones, and you have revealed them to babes. Yes, Father, for doing so was good in your eyes. 22 All things have been given over to me by my Father, and who the Son is nobody knows except the Father, and who the Father is, nobody knows except the Son, and anyone to whom the Son wishes to reveal him.”
	23 And after turning [Q: turning himself] towards the disciples he said: “Happy are the eyes [dual] that behold [the things] you behold. 24 For I say to you: Numerous prophets and kings wished to see the things that you behold, but they did not see them, and hear the things that you hear, but they did not hear them.”

25 Ar yé! şanyengolmo oronte, tyastien se, ar eques: “*Peantar, mana caruvan náven aryon oira coiviéno?” 26 Quentes senna: “Mana técina i Şanyesse? Manen hental?” 27 Hanquentasse quentes: “Alye mele i Héru Ainolya quanda endalyanen ar quanda fealyanen ar quanda poldorelyanen ar quanda sámalyanen, ar armarolya ve imle.” 28 Yésus quente senna: “Hanquentes mai; cara sie ar samuval coivie.”
	29 Mal sé, merila tana i náse faila, quente Yésunna: “Ar man ná armaronya?” 30 Hanquentasse Yésus quente: “Nér untala Yerúsalemello Yericonna lantane mici piluli, i namper lanneryar ar se-palpaner, se-hehtala imbe coive ar qualme. 31 Ve martane, *airimo ununte sana mallesse, mal íre se-cennes, langanes i hyana rímasse i malleo. 

25 And behold! a scribe arose, to test him, and he said: “Teacher, what am I to do to be heir of eternal life?” 26 He said to him: “What is written in the Law? How do you read?” 37 In answer he said: “You are to love the Lord your God with your whole heart and with your whole soul and with your whole strenght and your whole mind, and your neighbor as yourself.” 28 Jesus said to him: “You answered well; do so and you will have life.”
	29 But he, wishing to show that he was [Q: is] just, said to Jesus: “And who is my neighbor?” 30 In answer Jesus said: “A man going down from Jerusalem to Jericho fell among robbers, that took his clothes and beat him, abandoning him between life and death. 31 As [it] happened, a priest went down on that road, but when he saw him, he passed by in the other edge of the road.

32 Mí imya lé yú Lévíon, íre túles undu i nómenna ar cenne se, langane oa sello. 33 Mal Samárea nér lelyala i mallesse túle senna, ar íre cenneses, endarya etelende senna. 34 Túles har senna ar vaitane nahteryar, ulyala millo ar limpe to tai. Tá se-panyanes celvaryasse ar talle se *sendassenna ar cimne maureryar. 35 Ar i hilyala auresse nampes lenár atta, antane tu i turcon i *sendasseo, ar quente: 'Cima maureryar, ar ilqua ya *yuhtal han si, inye paityuva nan lyen íre nanwenuvan sir.'
	36 Man mici nelde sine sanal carne inse armaro i neren ye lantane imíca i pilur?” 37 Eques: “Ye oráve sesse.” Yésus tá quente senna: “Alye mene ar care i imya nat.”
	
38 In the same manner also a Levite, when he came down to the place and saw him, passed by away from him. 33 But a Samaritan man travelling on the road came to him, and when he saw him, his heart went out to him. 34 He came near to him and wrapped his wounds, pouring oil and wine on them. Then he placed him on his animal and brought him to an inn and heeded his needs. 35 And on the following day he took two denarii, gave them [dual] to the chief of the inn, and said: 'Heed his needs, and everything that you use beyond this, I will pay you back when I shall return hither.'
	36 Who among these three do you think made himself a neighbor to the man who fell among the robbers?” 37 He said: “[He] who had mercy on him.” Jesus then said to him: “You go and do the same thing.”
	
38 Sí íre oantelte lendes mir masto. Sisse nís estaina Marşa camne se mir coarya. 39 Enge as nís sina néşa yeo esse náne María, ye hamne undu ara i Heruo talu ar lastane quettaryanna. 40 Mal Marşa sáme máryat quante olya moliénen, ar túles ar quente: “Heru, ma ua valda lyen i néşanya ni-ehehtie erinqua molienyasse? Etta queta senna i mauya sen manya ni.” 41 Hanquentasse i Heru quente senna: “Marşa, Marşa, samil quárele ar nalye tarcaina pa rimbe natali. 42 Mal erya natwa ea maure. María icílie i mára ranta, ar sá ua nauva mapaina sello.”

38 Now when they went away he went into a city. Here a woman called Martha received him into her house. 39 [There] was with this woman a sister whose name was Mary, who sat down by the feet of the Lord and listened to his word. 40 But Martha had her hands full with much work, and she came and said: “Lord, is it not important to you that my sister has left me alone in my work? Therefore say to her that it is necessary for her to help me.” 41 In answer the Lord said to her: “Martha, Martha, you have anxiety and you are troubled about numerous things. 42 But of a single thing [there] is need. Mary has chosen the good part, and it will not be taken from her.”

RANTA 11
Ar túle, íre enges nómesse hyamila, in íre pustanes quén hildoryaron quente senna: “Heru, ámen peanta hyame, ve Yoháno yú peantane hildoryain.”
	2 Tá quentes téna: “Quiquie hyamilde, queta: Atar, na aire esselya. Aranielya na tuluva. 3 Ámen anta ilaurea massalma aure apa aure, 4 ar ámen apsene úcarelmar, an yú elme apsenir ilquenen ye same rohta men; ar ávame tulya úşahtienna.”

CHAPTER 11
And it happened [lit. came], when he was in a place praying, that when he stopped one of his disciples said to him: “Lord, teach us [how] to pray, like John also taught his disciples.”
	2 Then he said to them: “Whenever you pray, say: Father, let your name be holy. Let your kingdom come. Give us our daily bread day after day, 4 and forgive us our sins, for also we forgive everyone who has a debt to us; and do not lead us into temptation.”

5 Ar quentes téna: “Man mici le ye same meldo lelyuva senna endesse i lómio ar quetuva senna: 'Meldo, áni *yutya massainen nelde, 6 an meldo ninya utúlie ninna lendallo ar samin munta panien epe se'? 7 Ar sé i mityallo quete hanquentasse: 'Ávani tarce! I fenna ná pahta, ar hínanyar nar asinye i caimasse; ua ece nin orta antáven lyen.' 8 Quetin lenna: Qui uas orta ar anta sen pan náse meldorya, é ortuvas ar antauva sen vorongandeleryanen. 9 Etta quetin lenna: Á arca, ar nauva len antana; á cesta, ar hiruvalde; á tamba, ar nauva len latyana. 10 An ilquen arcala came, ar ilquen cestala hire, ar ilquenen tambala nauva latyana.

5 And he said to them: “Who among you that has a friend will go to him in the midst of the night and will say to him: 'Friend, loan me three loaves, 6 for a friend of mine has come to me from a journey and I have nothing to put before him'? 7 And he from the inside says in answer: 'Do not trouble me! The door is shut, and my children are with me in the bed; it is not possible for me to rise to give you [anything].' 8 I say to you: If he does not rise and give to him since he is his friend, indeed he will rise and give to him because of his persistence [vorongandele]. 9 Therefore I say to you: Ask, and [it] will be given to you; seek, and you will find; knock, and it will be opened to you. 10 For everyone asking receives, and everyone seeking finds, and to everyone knocking [it] will be opened.

11 Lau ea atar mici le ye, qui yondorya arca lingwe, cé antauva sen leuca i mende lingwio? 12 Hya qui yú arcas ohte, lau antauvas sen *nestaro? 13 Etta, qui elde i nar olce istar anta máre annar hínaldain, manen ole i menelda Atar antauva Aire Fea in arcar sello!”
	14 Ar et-hantes úpa rauco. Apa i rauco ettúle, i úpa nér carampe. Ar i şangar náner elmendasse. 15 Mal ennoli mici te quenter: “Et-hatis i raucor turconen i raucoron, Vélsevul.” 16 Ono exeli, tyastien se, cestaner sello tanwa et menello. 17 Istala símaltar quentes téna: “Ilya aranie şanca insanna ná nancarna, ar már şanca insanna lanta. 18 Mal qui yando Sátan şanca ná insenna, manen aranierya taruva? An quetilde in et-hatin i raucor Vélsevúlo túrenen.

11 Surely [there] is not [any] father among you who, if his son asks for a fish, will perhaps give him a serpent instead of a fish? 12 Or if he also asks for an egg, surely he will not give him a scorpion? 13 Therefore, if you that are wicked know [how] to give good gifts to your children, how [much] more the heavenly Father will give Holy Spirit to those that ask of him!”
	14 And he expelled a dumb demon. After the demon came out, the dumb man spoke. And the crowds were in wonder. 15 But some among them said: “He expels the demons by the chief of of the demons, Belzebul.” 16 But others, in order to test him, sought from him a sign out of heaven. 17 Knowing their imaginations he said to them: “Every kingdom split against itself is undone, and a home split against itself falls. 18 But if even Satan is split against himself, how will his kingdom stand? For you say that I expel the demons by Belzebub's power.

19 Qui túrenen Vélsevúlo et-hatin raucor, mannen yondolyar et-hatir te? Sina castanen nauvalte námoldar. 20 Mal qui Eruo lepernen et-hatin i raucor, Eruo aranie é utúlie lenna. 21 Íre polda nér, arwa carmaron, varya véra pacarya, armaryar nar rainesse. 22 Mal íre nér polda lá sé tule ar turue se, mapas oa i carmar ya i exe sanne antauva sen varnasse, ar etsatis i nati yar píles sello. 23 Ye ua asinye tare ninna, ar ye ua hosta, vinta.
	24 Íre úpoica faire tule et nerello, langas ter parce ménar cestala nóme séreva, ar íre uas hire, quetis: 'Nanwenuvan coanyanna yallo léven.' 25 Ar íre tulis, hiris sa carna poica ar netyana. 26 Tá autas ar tala óse hyane fairi otso, olce lá inse, ar apa tulilte minna marilte tasse, ar tana neren i métima sóma nauva ulca lá i minya.”

19 If by the power of Beelsebul I throw out demons, by whom do your sons throw them out? For this reason they will be your judges. 20 But if by God's finger I throw the demons out, God's kingdom has indeed come to you. 21 When a strong man, having weapons, protects his own court, his goods are [left] in peace. 22 But when a man stronger than him comes and overpowers him, he takes away the weapons which the other thought were going to [Q: will] give him security, and he distributes the things that he stole from him. 23 [He] who is not with me stands against me, and [he] who does not gather, scatters.
	24 When an unclean spirit comes out of a man, it passes through try regions seeking a place of rest, and when it does not find one, it says: 'I will return to my house from which I moved.' 25 And when it comes, it finds it made clean and adorned. 26 Then it goes away and brings with it seven other spirits, more wicked then itself, and after they come in they dwell there, and to that man the last state will be worse than the first.”

	27 Sí íre sé náne quetila nati sine, nís et i şangallo ortane ómarya ar quente senna: “Valime i súma ya lye-colle ar i i tyetsu yalto anel tyétina!” 28 Mal eques: “Arya ná qui quetil: Valime nar i hlarir Eruo quetta ar hepir sa!”
	29 Íre i şangar ocomner, quentes: “*Nónare sina ná ulca *nónare! Arcas tanwar, mal tanwa ua nauva antana san, hequa Yóno tanwa. 30 An ve Yóna olle tanwa i lien Ninevesse, sie yú i Atanyondo nauva tanwa *nónare sinan. 31 Hyarmeno tári nauva ortana i namiesse as i queni *nónare sino ar namuva te ulce, an túles cemeno mentello hlarien Solomondo sailie –  ar yé, sís ea amba lá Solomon! 32 I queni Ninevello ortuvar i namiesse as *nónare sina ar namuva sa ulca. An hirnelte inwis i mentanen ya Yóna talle, ar yé, sís ea amba lá Yóna!

	27 Now when he was saying these things, a woman out of the crowd raised her voice and said to him: “Happy the womb that bore you and the teats [dual] from which you were suckled!” 38 But he said: “[It] is better if you say: Happy are [those] that hear God's word and keep it!”
	29 When the crowds gathered, he said: “This generation is an evil generation. It asks for signs, but a sign will not be given to it, except the sign of Jonah. 30 For like Jonah became a sign to the people in Nineveh, so also the Son of Man will be a sign to this generation. 31 The queen of the south will be raised in the judgement with this generation and will judge them evil, for she came from the end of the earth to hear Solomon's wisdom, and behold, here is [something] more than Solomon. 32 The people from Niniveh will rise in the judgement with this generation and will judge it evil. For they found repentence at [-nen] the message rhat Jonah brought, and behold, here is [something] more than Jonah!

33 Nartiéla calma, mo ua panya sa cambosse hya nu lestacolca, mal i calmatarmasse, lavila in tulir minna cene i cala. 34 I hroan, i calma ná hendelya. Íre hendelya málesse ná, quanda hroalya yú calima ná, mal íre olca nás, yú hroalya morna ná. 35 Etta cima i sana cala ya ea lyesse ua mornie! 36 Sie, qui quanda hroalya calyaina ná, lá arwa ranto ya morna ná, ilqua nauva calyaina ve íre i calma calya lye alcaryanen!”
	37 Apa quentes ta, Farisa arcane i matumnes mat óse. Etta lendes minna ar caine undu ara i sarno. 38 Mal i Farisa náne elmendasse íre cennes i uas minyave sove inse nó i mat. 39 Mal i Heru quente senna: “Sí, a Farisar! Poitalde i ette i yulmo ar veneo, mal mityaldasse nalde quante pilweo ar olciéno. 

33 After lighting a lamp, one does not put it in a vault or under a measuring basket, but on the lampstand, allowing those that come in to see the light. 34 To the body, the lamp is your eye. When your eye is in health, your entire body is also bright, but when it is evil, your body is also dark. 35 Therefore take heed that that light which is in you is not darkness! 36 Thus, if your entire body is illuminated, not having [any] part which is dark, everything will be illuminated as when the lamp illumulates you with its ray!”
	37 After he said that, a Pharisee requested that he would eat a meal with him. Therefore he went inside and lay down at the table. 38 But the Pharisee was in wonder when he saw that he did not first wash himself before the meal. 39 But the Lord said to him: “Now, O Pharisees! You cleanse the outside of the cup and of the dish, but in the inside of you you are full of theft and wickedness!

40 Úhandar! Ye ontane i ette, ma uas ontane yú i mitya? 41 Mal á anta annar penyain et yallo ea mityaldasse, ar yé! ilqua nauva poica len. 42 Mal horro len, a Farisar, pan antalde i quaista ranta i minto ar i *laiquelisso ar ilya queo, mal langalde i failie ar i melme Eruva! Nati sine mauyaner len care, pen lengie i exi. 42 Horro len, a Farisar, an melilde same i minde sondar i *yomencoassen ar came i *suilier mí mancalenómi. 44 Horro len, an nalde ve i noiri yar uar aşcénime, tyárila queni vanta olla tai ú istiéno.”
	45 Hanquentasse quén imíca i şanyengolmor quente senna: “*Peantar, quetiénen nati sine antal ulca esse yú elmen.” 46 Tá quentes: “Horro yú len i nar şanyengolmor, an panyalde atanissen cólor urde colien, mal elde uar appa i cólar eryanen leperildaron! 

40 Senseless ones! [He] who created the outside, did he not also create the inside? 41 But give gifts to poor ones out of [that] which is in your inside, and behold! everything will be clean to you. 42 But woe to you, o Pharisees, since you give the tenth part of the mint and of the rue and of every vegetable, but you pass over the justice and the love for God! These things were necessary for you to do, without passing over the others. 42 Woe to you, o Pharisees, since you love to have the prominent seats in the synagoges and to receive the greatings in the market places. 44 Woe to you, for you are like the tombs that are not easy to see, causing people to walk over them without knowing.”
	45 In answer one among the lawyers said to him: “Teacher, by saying these things you give an evil name also to us.” 46 Then he said: “Woe also to you who are lawyers, for you put on men burders hard to bear, but you do not touch the burdens with a single one of your fingers!

	47 Horro len, an carastalde i noiri i Erutercánoin, mal atarildar nacanter te! 48 É nalde astarmor ar sanar mai pa atarildaron cardar, an té necanter i Erutercánor, mal elde carastar noiriltar! 49 Sina castanen Eruo sailie quente: Mentauvan téna Erutercánor ar aposteli, ar nahtuvalte ar roituvalte ennoli mici te, 50 ar sie ilye i Erutercánoron serce ya anaie et-ulyana i mardo tulciello tenna sí nauva cánina nónare sinallo, 51 sercello Ávelo tenna serce Secarío, ye náne nahtana imbi i *yangwe ar i Coa. Ná, nyáran len, nauvas cánina *nónare sinallo!
	52 Horro len i nar şanyengolmor, an amápielde oa i *latil istyava; elde uar mittane, ar i merner mitta pustanelde!”
	53 Íre etelendes talo i parmangolmor ar i Farisar *yestaner nire senna aicave ar ulya senna maquetiéli pa hyane natali, 54 se-tirila mapáven nat et antoryallo.

	47 Woe to you, for you build the tombs for the prophets, but your fathers killed them! 48 Indeed you are witnesses and think well of the deeds of your fathers, for they killed the prophets, but you build their tombs! 49 For this reason God's wisdom said: I will send to them prophets and apostles, and they will kill and they will persecute some among them, 50 and so the blood of all the prophets that has been poured out from the foundation of the world until now will be demanded from this generation, 51 from the blood of Abel until the blood of Zechariah, who was slain between the altar and the House. Yes, I am telling you, it will be demanded from this generation!
	52 Woe to you that are scribes, for you have taken away the key of knowledge; you did not enter, and [those] who wished to enter you stopped!”
	53 When he went out from there the the scribes and the Pharisees started to press against him terribly and to pour upon him questions about other things, 54 watching him to seize something out of his mouth.

RANTA 12
Lúme yanasse, íre i şanga náne ocómienwa mi *quaihúmeli, ta rimbe i quén *vattane i exe undu, *yestanes quete hildoryannar minyave: “Hepa inde oa i *pulmaxello i Fariryaron, yá *imnetie ná. 2 Mal ea munta nurtana ya ua nauva apantana, hya nulda ya ua nauva sinwa. 3 Etta, ilye nati yar quetilde i morniesse nauvar hlárine i calasse, ar ya hlussalde vére şamberyassen nauva carna sinwa i coaron tópallon. 4 Ente, quetin lenna i nar meldonyar: Áva ruce illon nahtar i hroa ar epeta uar pole care amba. 5 Mal tanuvan len manello mauya len ruce: Ruca yello apa nehtie same i túre hatiéva mir Ehenna. Ná, quetin lenna, ruca sello!”

CHAPTER 12
At that time, when the crowd had gathered in tens of thousands, so numerous that one trampled the other down, he began to say to his disciples first: “Keep yourselves away from the leaven of the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy. 2 But [there] is nothing hidden that will not be revealed, or secret that will not be known. 3 Therefore, all things which you say in the darkness will be heard in the light, and what you whisper in your own chambers will be made known from the roofs of the houses. 4 Moreover, I say to you that are my friends: Do not fear from [those] that kill the body and thereafter cannot do more. 5 But I will show you whom [Q: from whom] it is necessary for you to fear: Fear [him] who after killing has the power of throwing into Gehenna. Yes, I say to you, fear him!”

6 Filit atta nát vácine mitta urusteva attan, lá? Ananta Eru ua loita enyale er mici tu. 7 Mal yando careldo findi nar illi nótine. Áva ruce; nalde mirwe lá rimbe filici.
	8 Mal quetin lenna: Ilquen ye *etequenta ni epe atani, sé i Atanyondo yú *etequentuva epe Eruo vali. 9 Mal ye laquete ni epe atani nauva laquétina epe Eruo vali. 10 Ar ilquenen ye quete quetta i Atanyondonna, ta nauva apsénina, mal yen naiquete i Aire Feanna, ta ua nauva apsénina. 11 Mal íre talalde le epe combi ar cánor ar túri, áva same quárele pa manen hya mananen varyuvalde inde, hya pa mana quetuvalde; 12 an i Aire Fea peantauva lúme entasse pa i nati yar mauyar len quete.”

	6 Two sparrows [filit: little bird] are [dual] sold for two copper pieces, no? And yet God does not fail to recall one among them [dual]. 7 But  even the hairs of your head are all counted. Do not fear; you are more precious than many sparrows.
	8 But I say to you: Everyone who confesses me before men, him the Son of Man will also confess before God's angels. 9 But [he] who denies me before men will be denied before God's angels. 10 And to everyone who speaks a word against the Son of Man, that will be fogiven, but to [anyone] who blasphemes agaist the Holy Sprit, that will not be forgiven. 11 But when they bring you before councils and governors and powers, do not have anxiety about how or with what you will defend yourselves, or about what you will say; 12 for the Holy Spirit will teach you in that hour about the things that it is necessary for you to say.”

13 Tá quén i şangasse quente senna: “*Peantar, queta hánonyanna i mauya sen anta nin masse i *aryoniesse!” 14 Quentes senna: “A nér, man ni-panyane namien let hya etsatien lent *aryoniesta?” 15 Tá quentes téna: “Cima ar á varya inde ilya milciello, an yando íre quén same úve, coivierya ua tule armaryallon.” 16 Ente, quentes téna sestie, quetila: “I nóre lárea nerwa antane hoa yávie. 17 Ar carnes úvie sámaryasse, quetila: 'Mana caruvan, sí ire penin nóme yasse polin hosta yávienya?' 18 Ar quentes: 'Caruvan sie: Nancaruvan hauranyar, ar carastuvan haurali hoe lá tai, ar tasse hostuvan ilya orenya ar ilye máre natinyar; 19 ar quetuvan imninna: 'Sí samil rimbe máre natali haurasse rimbe loalin. Sera, mata, suca, sama alasse!'

13 Then a person in the crowd said to him: “Teacher, say to my brother that [it] is necessary for him to give me a portion in the inheritance!” 14 He said to him: “O man, who put me [in a position] to judge you [dual] or to distribute to you [dual] your [dual] inheritance?” 15 Then he said to them: “Take heed and protect yourselves from all greed, for also [/even] when a person has abundance, his life does not come from his possessions.” 16 Furthermore, he spoke to them a comparison, saying: “The land of a rich man gave a big harvest. 17 And he made a consideration in his mind, saying: 'What am I to do, now when I lack a place where I can gather my harvest?' 18 And he said: 'I will do so: I will tear down [nancar-, 'undo'] my stores, and I will build some stores larger than them, and there I will gather all my grain and all my good things, 19 and I will say do myself: 'Now you have numerous good things in store for many years. Rest, eat, drink, have joy!'

	20 Mal Eru quente senna: 'Úhanda nér! Lóme sinasse canilte cuilelya lyello. Tá man samuva yar ahastiel?' Sie euva yen hosta harma insen, mal ua lárea Erun.”
	22 Tá quentes hildoryannar: “Sina castanen quetin lenna: Áva same quárele pa inde, pa mana matuvalde, hya pa hroaldar, pa i lanni yar coluvalde. 23 An i cuile ná mirwa lá matso, ar i hroa lá lanni. 24 Cima i quácor, i ualte rere hya *cirihta, ar ualte same haurar hya ataqui hepien nati, ananta Eru anta tien masto. Manen mirwe lá aiwi elde nar! 25 Man mici le, quáreleryanen, pole napane erya *perranga coivieryo andienna? 26 Qui sie ualde pole care i ampitya nat, manen ná i samilde quárele pa i lemyala nati? 27 Cima manen i indili alir; ualte móta hya lanya, mal nyarin len: Yando Solomon ilya alcareryasse úne netyana ve er mici té!

	20 But God said to him: 'Senseless man! In this night they demand your life from you. Then who will have [the things] that you have gathered?' So [it] will be for [the one] who gathers treasure for himself, but is not rich to God.”
	22 Then he said to his disciples: “For this reason I say to you: Do not have anxiety about yourselves, about what you will eat, or about your bodies, about the things that you will wear. 23 For the life [you have] is more precious than food, and the body than clothes. 24 Give heed to the ravens [or, crows – quácor], that they do not sow or harvest, and they do not have stores or buildings for keeping thigns, and yet God gives them food. How [much] more precious than birds you are! 25 Who among you, by worrying, can add a single cubit to the length of his life? 26 If thus you cannot do the smallest thing, how is [it] that you have worries about the remaining things? 27 Heed how the lilies grow; they do not toil or weave, but I tell you: Also [/even] Solomon in all his glory was not adorned like one among them!

28 Qui Eru sie netya i celvar i restasse, i ear síra ar enwa nar hátine mir urna, manen ole ambe netyuvas lé, elde pitya saviéno! 29 Etta áva cesta mana matuvalde hya mana sucuvalde, ar áva same quárele, 30 an ilye nati sine nar yar i mardo liendi cestar, ono Atarelda ista i samilde maure sine nativa. 31 Mal á cesta minyave aranierya, ar nati sine nauvar len napánine!
	32 Áva ruce, á pitya lámáre, an Atarelda asánie mai anta len i aranie! 33 Vaca yar samilde ar á anta annar i penyain. Cara len *pocoller i ua oi yeryuvar, *alaloitala harma menelde, yasse arpo ua tule har hya malo ammate. 34 An yasse harmalda ea, tasse yú endalda euva.
	35 Hepa i quilta oşweldasse ar calmaldar uryala, 36 ar elde na ve atani hopila herulto entulessen i veryanwello, polieltan latya sen mí imya lú ya tulis tambala.

28 If God so adorns the plants in the field, that exist today and tomorrow are thrown into an oven, how much more will he adorn you, you of little faith! 29 Therefore do not seek what you are to eat or what you are to drink, and do not have anxiety, 30 for all these things are [the things] that the nations of the world seek, but your Father knows that you have need of these things. 31 But seek first his kingdom, and these things will be added to you!
	32 Do not be afraid, o little flock, for your Father has thought well to give you the kingdom! 33 Sell [the things] that you have and give gifts to the poor. Make for yourselves pouches that will not ever wear, an unfailing treasure in heaven, where a thief does not come near or a moth devour. 34 For [in the place] where your treasure is, there also your heart will be.
	35 Keep the belt on your hips and your lamps burning, 36 and you be like men waiting for  their master's return from the marriage, for them to be able to open to him in the same moment that he comes knocking.

37 Valime nar i móli ion heru, íre nanwenis, hire te tíra! Násie quetin lenna: Notuvas *os oşwerya ar lavuva tien caita ara i sarno, ar tuluvas náven núro tien. 38 Ar qui tulis mí attea tirisse, hya mí neldea, ar hire te sie, valime nalte! 39 Mal á ista nat sina, i qui i *coantur sinte i lúme yasse i arpo tulumne, anes coiva ar ua láve aiquenen race mir coarya. 40 Yú elde na manwane, an i Atanyondo túla mi lúme ya ualde sana.
	41 Tá Péter quente: “Heru, ma quetil sestie sina elmenna hya yú ilyannar?” 42 Ar i Heru quente: “É man ná i voronda mardil, i handa, yeo ortíriesse herurya panyuva ilye núroryar, antieryan tien matsolta mí vanima lúme?

37 Happy are the thralls whose master, when he returns, finds them watching! Truly I say to you: He will bind around his hip and will allow them to lie at the table, and he will come to be a servant to them. 38 And if he comes in the second watch, or in the third, and finds them so, happy they are! 39 But know this thing, that if the master of the house knew the time when the thief was going to come, he was awake and did not allow anyone to break into his house. 40 You as well be ready, for the Son of Man is coming at a time that you do not think.
	41 Then Peter said: “Lord, do you speak this comparison to us or also to all?” 42 And the Lord said: “Indeed who is the faithful steward, the intelligent one, in whose oversight his lord will place all his servants, for him to give them their food at the proper time?

43 Valima ná mól tana, ye herurya íre tulis hiruva cára sie. 44 Nanwave quetin lenna i or ilye armaryar se-panyuvas. 45 Mal qui mól tana quete endaryasse: 'Herunya ua tuluva rato', ar *yestas pete i núror ar i *núri, ar mate ar suce ar quate inse limpenen, 46 sana mólo heru tuluva auresse ya uas sane ar lúmesse ya uas ista, ar se-peryuvas ar sen-antauva masserya as i úvorondar. 47 Tá mól tana ye hanyane heruryo şelma, mal ua manwane inse hya carne şelmarya, nauva palpana rimbe tarambolínen. 48 Mal ye ua hanyane sa, ar sie carne nati valde palpiéno, nauva palpana mance tarambolínen. An ho ilquen yen olya anaie antana, olya nauva cánina, ar ho quén yeo ortíriesse queni apánier olya, canuvalte amba lá senwa.

42 Happy is that thrall, whom his master when he comes will find doing so. 44 Truly I say to you that over all his goods he will put him. 45 But if that thrall says in his heart: 'My master will not come soon', and he begins to strike the servants and the maidservants, and eats and drinks and fills himself with wine, 46 that thrall's master will come in a day that he does not think and at an hour that he does not know, and he will cut him in two and give him his portion with the faithless ones. 47 Then that thrall who understood his master's wish, but did not prepear himself or did his will, will be beaten with many blows. 48 But [he] who did not understand it, and so did things worthy of beating, will be beaten with few blows. For from anyone to whom much has been given, much will be demanded, and from a person in whose oversight people have placed much, they will demand more than usual.

	49 Náre utúlien hate cemenna, ar mana meruvan qui anaies nartana yando sí? 50 Sumbie samin yanen nauvan sumbana, ar manen níraina nanye tenna anaies telyaina! 51 Ma sanilde i utúlien antáven raine cemende? Lá, quetin lenna, mal şancie! 52 An ho sí euvar lempe şance erya coasse, nelde attanna ar atta neldenna. 53 Nauvalte şance, atar yondonna ar yondo atarenna, amil yeldenna ar yelde amillenna, ar nís yondoryo verinna, ar i veri veruryo amillenna.”
	54 Tá yú quentes i şangannar: “Íre cenilde lumbo ortea Númesse, mí imya lú quetilde: Raumo túla –  ar sie euva. 55 Ar íre cenilde şúre ya váva Hyarmello, quetilde: Lauca nauva – ar sie euva. 56 *Imnetyandor, istalde henta cemeno ar menelo ilce, mal manen ná i ualde ista henta lúme sina? 

	49 A fire I have come to throw upon earth, and what am I to wish if it has been kindled even now? 50 A baptism I have that I will be baptized with, and howI am being pressed until it has been completed! 51 Do you think that I have come to give peace on earth? No, I say to you, but division! 52 For from now [there] will be five split in a single house, three against two and two against three. 53 They will be split, father against son and son against father, mother against daughter and daughter against mother, and a woman against her son's wife, and the wife against her husband's mother.”
	54 Then he also said to the crowds: “When you see a cloud rising in the West, in the same moment you say: A storm is coming – and so it will be. 55 And when you see wind that blows from South, you say: It will be hot – and so it will be. 56 Hypocrites, you know [how] to read the appearance of earth and heaven, but how is [it] that you do not know [how] to read this time?

57 Manen ná in ualde name yúelden mana faila ná? 58 An íre ménal as ñottolya námonna, rica mí malle náven léra costelyallo óse – hya tucuvas lye epe i námo, ar i námo antauva lye olla i  *námondurenna, ar i *námondur hatuva lye mir mando. 59 Nyarin lyen: Ual ettuluva talo nó apaitiel i métima pitya ranta urusteva!”

57 How is [it] that you cannot judge also for yourselves what is just? 58 For when you [sg.] are going with your enemy to a judge, strive in the way to be free from your strife with him – or he will draw you before the judge, and the judge will give you over to the court servant [lit. judge-servant], and the court-servant will throw you into jail. 59 I tell you: You [sg.] will not come out from there before you have paid the last small piece of copper!”

RANTA 13
Lúme yanasse ennoli i enger tasse nyarner sen pa i queni Alileallo ion serce Piláto etulyane mir serce *yancaltaron. 2 Etta hanquentasse quentes téna: “Ma intyalde i queni sine Alileallo náner úcarindoli ambe túre lá ilye exi Alileasse, pan perpérelte ta? 3 Laume, quetin lenna; mal qui ualde hire inwis, illi mici le nauvar nancárine mí imya lé. 4 Hya i toloque innar i mindo Siloamesse lantane, nahtala te – ma intyalde i sámelte rohta túra lá ya ilye exi i marir Yerúsalemesse samir? 5 Laume, quetin lenna; mal qui ualde hire inwis, illi mici le nauvar nancárine mí imya lé. 

CHAPTER 13
At that time some that were there told him about the people from Galilee whose blood Pilate poured forth into the blood of their sacrifices. 2 Therefore in answer he said to them: “Do you suppose that these people from Galilee were sinners greater than all others in Galilee, since they suffered that? 3 By no means, I say to you; but if you do not find repentance, all among you will be destroyed in the same manner. 4 Or the eighteen upon whom the tower in Siloam fell, killing them – do you suppose that they had a debt greater than [that] which all others that live in Jerusalem have? 5 By no means, I say to you; but if you do not find repentance, all among you will be destroyed in the same manner.

	6 Tá quentes téna sestie sina: “Nér sáme *relyávalda tarwaryasse liantassion, ar túles cestien yáve sesse, mal hirnes munta. 7 Tá quentes i *tarwandurenna: 'Yé, loassen nelde utúlien cestala yáve *relyávalda sinasse, mal ihírien munta. Áse cire undu! Mana casta ea hepien se tasse, hepila i talan pen antáve yáve?' 8 Hanquentasse quentes senna: 'Heru, ásen lave tare yú loa sinasse, ar sapuvan *os se ar panyuva múco tasse. 9 Qui tá antauvas yáve i tuluvaila loasse, mára ná. Mal qui laias, ciruvalyes undu.'”
	10 Sí Yésus náne peantala mi er i *yomencoaron i *sendaresse. 11 Ar yé! enge tasse nís ye ter loar toloque náne haryaina lo faire se-carila milya: Anes cúna, ar ua ence sen tare téra.

	6 Then he spoke to them this comparison: “A man had a fig tree in his garden of vines, and he came to seek fruit on it, but he found nothing. 7 Then he said to the gardener: 'Look, for three years I have come seeking fruit on this fig tree, but I have found nothing. Cut it down! What reason is [there] for keeping it there, keeping the ground [occupied] without giving fruit?'”  8 In answer he said to him: 'Lord, allow it do stand also this year, and I will dig around it and will place muck there. 9 If it will then give fruit in the coming year, very well. But if it does not, you will cut it down.'”
	10 Now Jesus was teaching in one of the synagogues on the day of rest. 11 And behold! [there] was there a woman who for [ter, through] eighteen years was possessed by a spirit making her weak: She was bent, and it was not possible for her to stand straight.

12 Mal íre cennes i nís, Yésus yalde se insenna ar quente: “Nís, nalye leryana i hlívello lye-carila milya.” 13 Ar panyanes máryat sesse, ar mí imya lú orontes tarien téra, ar antanes alcar Erun. 14 Mal i turco i *yomencavo, nála rúşea pan Yésus nestane i *sendaresse, quente i şanganna: “Ear auri enque yassen mauya mole! Etta tula mi tai náven nestana, ar lá i *sendaresse!” 15 Mal i Heru hanquente senna: “*Imnetyandor, ma ua ilquen mici le i *sendaresse lehta mundorya hya *pelloporya ho i salquecolca ar tulya se oa sucien? 16 Mal nís sina, ye ná Avraham yelde ye Sátan ehépie hampa ter loar toloque – ma ua mauyane se-lehta núte sinallo i *sendaresse?” 17 Ar íre quentes ta, ilye i tarner senna náner nucumne, ar i quanda şanga sáme alasse pa ilye i alquarinque nati yar martaner sénen.

12 But when he saw the woman, Jesus called her to himself and said: “Woman, you are freed from the illness making you weak.” 13 And he put his hands on her, and in the same moment she arose to stand straight, and she gave glory to God. 14 But the chief of the synagogue, being angry since Jesus healed on the day of rest, said to the crowd: “There are six days in which it is necessary to work. There come on them to be healed, and not on the day of rest!” 15 But the Lord answered him: “Hypocrites, does not everyone among you on the day of rest loose his ox or his ass from the manger [lit. grass-box] and lead it away to drink? 16 But this woman, who is a daughter of Abraham whom Satan has kept restrained for [lit. through] eighteen years – was it not necessary to loose her from this bond on the day of rest?” 17 And when he said that, all that stood against him were humiliated, and the entire crowd had joy concerning all the glorious things that happened by him.

	18 Etta quentes: “Ve mana Eruo aranie, ar as mana sestuvanyes? 19 Nas ve erde *sinapio, ya nér nampe ar panyane tarwaryasse, ar alles mir alda, ar menelo aiwi marner olvaryassen.”
	20 Ar ata quentes: “As mana sestuvan Eruo aranie? 21 Nas ve *pulmaxe, ya nís nampe ar nurtane lestassen nelde poriva, tenna ilqua náne púlienwa.”
	22 Ar lendes ostollo ostonna ar mastollo mastonna, peantala íre ménanes Yerúsalemenna. 23 Sí quén quente senna: “Heru, ma nar i rehtainar mance?” Quentes téna: 24 “Rica menien minna ter i náha fenna! An rimbali, quetin lenna, cestuvar mene minna, mal ualte poluva, 25 i lúmello ya i heru i cavo orontie ar apahtie i fenna, ar tarilde i ettesse, tambala i fennasse, quetila: 'Heru, ámen latya!' Mal hanquentasse quetuvas lenna: 'Uan ista mallo utúlielde.'

	18 Therefore he said: “Like what [is] God's kingdom, and with what am I to compare it? 19 It is like a seed of mustard, that a man took and put in his garden, and it grew into a tree, and the birds of heaven dwelt in its branches.”
	20 And again he said: “With what am I to compare God's kingdom? 21 It is like leaven, which a woman took and hid in three measures of meal, until everythign was leavened [lit. Swollen].” 
	22 And he went from city to city and from village to village, teaching while he was travelling to Jerusalem. 23 Now a person said to him: “Lord, are the saved ones few?” He said to them: 24 “Strive to go inside through the narrow door! For numerous ones, I say to you, will seek to go inside, but they will not be able, 25 from the hour that he master of the house has arisen and has closed the door, and you stand on the outside, knocking on the door, saying: 'Lord, open to us!' But in answer he will say to you: 'I do not know where you have come from.'

26 Tá quetuvalde: 'Mantelme ar suncelme epe lye, ar peantanel mallelmassen!' 27 Mal hanquetuvas lenna sie: 'Uan ista mallo utúlielde. Heca nillo, ilye i carir úfailie!' 28 Tasse yaimelda ar molielda nelciva euvar, íre cenilde Avraham ar Ísac ar Yácov ar ilye i Erutercánor mi Eruo aranie, mal elde nar hátine ettenna. 29 Ente, queni tuluvar Rómello ar Númello ar Formello ar Hyarmello, ar caituvalte ara i sarno mi Eruo aranie. 30 Ar yé! ear teldali i nauvar minye, ar ear minyali i nauvar telde.”
	
26 Then you will say: 'We ate and drank before you, and you taught in our streets!' 27 But he will answer you so: 'I do not know where you have come from. Begone from me, all who do unrighteousness!' 28 There your wailing and your grinding of teeth will be, when you see Abraham and Isaac and Jacob and all the prophets in God's kingdom, but you are thrown outside. 29 Furthermore, people will come from East and West and North and South, and they will lie at the table in God's kingdom. 30 And behold! [there] are some last ones that will be first, and [there] are some first ones that will be last.”

	31 Lúme yanasse túler Farisáli i quenter senna: “Mena ettenna ar á auta silo, an Herol mere nahta lye!” 32 Ar quentes téna: “Mena ar queta rusco tananna: Yé, et-hatin raucor ar carin nestie síra ar enwa, ar i neldea auresse nauvan telyana. 32 Ananta mauya nin lelelya mallenyasse síra ar enwa ar i hilyala auresse, an ua lávina Erutercánon náve nancarna ettesse Yerusalémo. 34 Yerúsalem, Yerúsalem, ye nahta i Erutercánor ar *sarya i anaier mentaine senna – manen rimbave mernen comya hínalyar ve poroce comya nessaryar nu rámaryat! Mal ualde merne. 35 Yé, coalda ná len hehtana! Nyáran lenna i laume ni-cenuvalde tenna quetuvalde: Aistana ná ye túla mí Héruo esse!”

	31 At that time [there] came some Pharisees that said to him: “Go out and go away from here, for Herod wishes to kill you!” 32 And he said to them: “Go and say to that fox: Behold, I throw out demons and I perform healing today and tomorrow, and on the third day I am finished. 32 And yet it is necessary for me to keep travelling on my road today and tomorrow and on the following day, for it is not allowed for a prophet to be destroyed outside of Jerusalem. 34 Jerusalem, Jerusalem, who kills the prophets and stones those that have been sent to her – how often [rimbave, frequently] I wanted to gather your children like a hen gathers her young under her wings! But you did not want to. 35 Behold, your house is abandoned to yourselves! I am tellomg you that you will by no means see me until you shall say: Blessed is [he] who is coming in the name of the Lord!”

RANTA 14
Ar mi lú íre lendes mir coa turcova i Farisaron matien massa, tirneltes har. 2 Ar yé! enge tasse nér epe se ye náne púlienwa, arwa acca olya neno hroaryasse. 3 Etta Yésus carampe i şanyengolmonnar, quetila: “Ma ná lávina i *sendaresse nesta, hya lá?” 4 Mal anelte quilde. Tá nampes i nér, nestane se ar mentane se oa. 5 Ar quentes téna: “Man mici le, qui yondorya hya mundorya lanta mir tampo, ua tucuva se ama i *sendaresse?” 6 Ar ualte pole hanquete nati sine.
	7 Tá nyarnes sestie i nerin i náner tultaine, íre túnes manen cillelte i amminde nómi inten, quetila téna: 8 “Íre nalde tultaine lo quén veryanwenna, áva caita undu i amminda nómesse. Cé quén minda lá elye anaie tultana lo se, 9 ar i quén ye lye-tultane tuluva ar quetuva lyenna: 'Lava nér sinan same i nóme!' Ar tá mauya lyen mene nucumna i amnalda nómenna.

CHAPTER 14
And on an occasion when he went into a house of a chief of the Pharisees to eat bread, they watched him closely.
	2 And behold! [there] was there a man before him who was swollen, having too much water in his body. 3 Therefore Jesus spoke to the lawyers, saying: “Is it allowed on the day of rest to heal, or not?” 4 But they were silent. Then he took the man, healed him and sent him away. 5 And he said to them: “Who among you, if his son or his ox falls into a well, does not pull him [/it] up on the day of rest?” 6 And they could not answer these things.
	7 Then he told a comparison to the men that were invited, when he perceived how they close the most prominent places for themselves, saying to them: 8 “When you are summoned by a person to a wedding, do not lie down at the most prominent place. Perhaps a person more prominent than you has been invited by him, 9 and the person who summoned you will come and say to you: 'Allow this man to have the place!' And then it is necessary for you to go humbled to the lowest place.

10 Mal íre nalye tultana, mena ar á caita i amnalda nómesse. Sie, íre i nér ye tultane lye tule, quetuvas lyenna: 'Meldo, tula ama, ambe inga!' Tá samuval alcar epe ilye i queni i anaier tultaine aselye. 11 An ilquen ye orta inse nauva nucumna, mal ye nucume inse nauva ortana.”
	12 Ente, quentes yenna tultane se: “Íre caril şinyemat hya ahtumat, áva tulta meldolyar, hya hánolyar, hya i queni nosselyo, hya lárie armarolyar. Cé yú té tultauvar lyé nan, ar ta nauva lyen *nampaityale. 13 Mal íre caril merende, á tulta penyar, *hroaloicali, *úlévimar, laceníti, 14 ar nauval valima, an té samir munta yanen ece tien paitya lyen. An nauva paityana lyen qualinaron ortiesse!”

10 But when you are invited, go and lie at the lowliest place. Thus, when the man who invited you comes, he will say to you: 'Friend, come up, higher!' Then you will have glory before the people that have been invited with you. 11 For everyone who raises [/elevates] himself will be humbled, but [he] who humbles himself will be raised up.”
	12 Furthermore, he said to [the one] who invited him: “When you make an evening meal or a supper, do not summon your friends, or your brothers, or the people of your kin, or your rich neighbors. Perhaps they also will invite you again, and that will be for you a paying back. 13 But when you make a feast, invite poor ones, cripples, lame ones, blind ones, 14 and you will be happy, for they have nothing with which it is possible for them to repay you. For [it] will be repaid to you in the rising of [the] dead!”

15 Hlarila ta, quén mici i cainer ara i sarno quente: “Valima ná ye mate massa mi Eruo aranie!”
	16 Yésus quente senna: “Enge nér ye manwane túra ahtumat, ar tultanes rimbali. 17 Ar mentanes núrorya i ahtumatto lúmesse, quetien innar náner tultaine: “Tula, an sí ilqua manwa ná!” 18  Mal illi mici te *yestaner anta castali uien tule. I minya quente senna: 'Amancien imnin resta, ar mauya nin lelya cenien sa. Iquin lyello, áva sana ulco pa ni pan ua ece nin tule!' 19 Ar exe quente: 'Amancien imnin yantar lempe mundoron, ar ménan tyastien te. Iquin lyello, áva sana ulco pa ni pan ua ece nin tule.' 20 Ar exe quente: 'Evérien nissenna, ar etta ua ece nin tule.' 21 Íre nanwennes, i mól nyarne nati sine heruryanna. Tá i cavo turco náne rúşea ar quente mólyanna: 'Mena lintiénen mir i maller ar tier i ostosse, ar á tala sir i penyar ar *hroaloicar ar *cénelórar ar *úlévimar!' 

15 Hearing that, one among [those] who lay at the table said: “Happy is [the one] who eats bread in God's kingdom!”
	16 Jesus said to him: “[There] was a man who prepared a great supper, and he invited numerous ones. 17 And he sent his servant at the hour of the supper, to say to [those] who were invited: “Come, for now everything is ready!” 18 But all among them started to give reasons not to come. The first said to him: 'I have bought [lit. traded to myself] a field, and it is necessary for me to go to see it. I beg of you, do not think evil about me since it is not possible for me to come!' 19 And another said: 'I have traded to myself five yokes of oxes, and I am going to test them. I beg of you, do not think evil about me since it is not possible for me to come.' 20 And another said: 'I have married a woman, and therefore it is not possible for me to come.' 21 When he returned, the thrall told these things to his lord. Then the chief of the house was angry and said to his thrall: 'Go with speed into the streets and ways in the city, and bring here the poor ones and cripples and blind ones and lame ones!'

22 Ar i mól quente: “Heru, ya cannel anaie carna, ar en ea nóme.” 23 Ar i heru quente i mólenna: “Á etelelya mir i maller ar i pelerinnar ar áten mauya tule minna, quatien coanya. 24 An quetin lenna: *Úquen imíca i neri i náner tultaine tyavuvar ahtumattinya!'”
	25 Sí hoe şangali lelender óse, ar quernes inse ar quente téna: 26 “Qui aiquen tule ninna ar ua teve atarya ar amillerya ar verirya ar hínaryar ar hánoryar ar néşaryar, é véra cuilerya, ua ece sen náve hildonya. 27 Yen ua cóla tarwerya ar túla apa ni, ua ece náve hildonya. 28 An man mici le i mere carasta mindo ua minyave hame undu onotien i nonwe carastiéno, istien qui samis fárea telpe telien sa? 29 Qui laias, cé panyas i mindo talma, mal ua ece sen telya i mindo, ar ilye i tírar cé *yestuvar quete yaiwe pa se, 30 quetila: 'Nér sina *yestane carasta, mal ua ence sen telya.'

22 And the thrall said: “Lord, what you commanded has been done, and still [there] is place.” 23 And the lord said to the thrall: “Go out into the roads and to the fenced fields and compel them to come inside, in order to fill my house. 24 For I say to you [pl.]: No one among the men that were invited will taste my supper!'”
	25 Now great crowds were travelling with him, and he turned [Q: turned himself] and said to them: 26 “If anyone comes to me and does not hate his father and his mother and his wife and his sisters, indeed his own life, [it] is not possible for him to be my disciple. 27 To [the one] who is not carrying his cross and coming after me, it is not possible to be my disciple. 28 For who among you that wishes to build a tower does not first sit down to calculate the sum [/cost] of building, to know if he as enough money to complete it? 29 If he does not, perhaps he puts the foundation of the tower [in place], but it is not possible for him to complete it, and all that are watching will perhaps start to speak mockery about him, 30 saying: 'This man started to build, but it was not possible for him to finish.'

 31 Hya man ná i aran ye veluva hyana aran ohtasse ar ua minyave hame undu carien úvie qui polis ohtarinen húmi quean mahta yenna tule senna arwa húmi *yúquean? 32 Qui uas pole mahta senna, mentas queni i quetuvar rá sen íre i exe en haira ná, cestala raine. 33 Sie, etta, *úquen mici le ye ua quete namárie ilye armaryannar pole náve hildonya.
	34 Singe é ná mára, mal qui i singeo tyáve nauva vanwa, mananen mo antauva san tyáve ata? 35 Uas mára cemnen hya ve múco véla. Queni hatir sa ettenna. Lava yen same hlaru lastien, lasta!

31 Or who is the king who will meet another king at war and does not first sit down to make a consideration whether he can with ten thousand warriors fight against [the one] who comes against him having twenty thousands? 32 If he cannot fight against him, he sends people who will speak on his behalf while the other is still far away, seeking peace. 33 Thus, therefore, no one among you that does not say farewell to all his goods can be my disciple.
	34 Salt is indeed good, but if the taste of the salt is gone, with what will one give it taste again? 35 It is not good for soil or as manure alike. People throw it outside. Let [him] who has ears to listen, listen!  

RANTA 15
Ilye i *tungwemor ar úcarindor túler har senna hlarien se. 2 Etta i Farisar ar i şanyengolmor nurruner, quetila: “Nér sina came úcarindor ar mate aselte!” 3 Tá quentes sestie sina téna: 4 “Man ná i nér mici le arwa mámaron tuxa ye ua, qui er mici te ná vanwa, hehtuva i nerte *neterquean i erumasse ar cestuva i vanwa máma tenna hirises? 5 Ar apa hirie se panyuvas se pontiryasse, arwa alasseo. 6 Ar apa tulie marda tultas meldoryar ar armaroryar ar quete téna: 'Na valime asinye, an ihírien mámanya, ye náne vanwa.' 7 Quetin lenna i mí imya lé, íre er úcarindo hire inwis, ea menelde alasse túra lá ya ea pa úcarindor nerte *neterquean i uar same maure inwisteva.
	8 Hya man ná i nís ye same racmar quean ye ua narta calma ar poita coarya qui er mici tai ná vanwa, cestala harive tenna hirises? 9 Ar íre sa-ihíries, comyas melderyar ar *armareryar ar quete: 'Na valime asinye, an ihírien i racma ya náne vanwa nin!' 10 Sie, quetin lenna, euva alasse mici Eruo vali pa er úcarindo ye hire inwis.”

CHAPTER 15
All the tax collectors and sinners came near to him to hear him. 2 Therefore the Pharisees and the lawyers grumbled, saying: “This man receives sinners and eats with them!” 3 Then he spoke this comparison to them: 4 “Who is the man among you having a hundred sheep who does not, if one among them is lost, leave the ninety-nine in the wilderness and will seek the lost sheep until he finds it? 5 And after finding it he will put it on his back, having joy. 6 And after coming home he summons his friends and his neighbors and says to them: 'Be happy with me, for I have found my sheep, that was lost.' 7 I say to you that in the same manner, when one sinner finds repentance, [there] is in heaven a joy greater than [that] which [there] is concerning ninety-nine sinners that do not have need of repentance.
	8 Or who is the woman who has ten drachmas who does not kindle a lamp and clean her house if one of them is lost, seeking closely until she finds it? 9 And when she has found it, she gathers her friends [melde: female friend] and says: 'Be happy with me, for I have found the drachma that was lost to me!' 10 Thus, I say to you, [there] will be joy among God's angels concerning one sinner who finds repentance.”

	11 Tá quentes: “Enge nér as ye enget yondo atta. 12 Ar i ambe nessa mici tu quente ataryanna: “Atar, ánin anta i ranta i armaron ya lanta massenyan.” Tá *ciltanes laulestarya tún. 13 Epeta, apa lá rimbe auri, i ambe nessa yondo comyane ilqua ar lende oa mir haira nóre, ar tasse hantes oa telperya verca coiviesse. 
	14 Apa *yuhtanes ilqua enge urda saicele nóre tanasse, ar *yestanes same maure. 15 Lendes himyala er i quenion i marner nóre tanasse, ye mentane se mir restaryar tirien polcar. 16 Ar mernes quate inse i vainínen yar i polcar manter, mal *úquen antane sen nat.

	11 Then he said: “[There] was a man with whom [there] were two sons. 12 And the younger among them [dual] said to his father: “Father, give me the part of the goods that falls to my portion.” Then he divided his livelihood to them [dual]. 13 Thereafter, after not many days, the younger son gathered everything and went away into a remote land, and here he threw away his money on a wild life.
	14 After he used [or, spent] everything, [there] was a severe famine in that land, and he began to have need. 15 He went attaching himself to one of the people that lived in that land, who sent him into his fields to watch pigs. 16 And he wished to fill himself with the pods that the pigs were eating, but no one gave him a thing.

17 Mal íre nanwennes laicenna quentes: “Ilye i paityane queni i molir atarinyan samir úve massava,   íre inye quéla saicelénen! 18 Ortuvan ar lelyuvan atarinyanna, ar quetuvan senna: Atar, úacárien menelenna ar tyenna. 19 Uan valda en náven estaina yondotya, mal áni care ve er i paityane quenion i molir tyen.'
	20 Ar orontes ar túle ataryanna. Íre en anes haiya, i atar cenne se, ar endarya etelende senna, ar norila senna lantanes axeryanna ar minque se. 21 Mal i yondo quente: 'Atar, úacárien menelenna ar tyenna. 22 Uan valda en náven estaina yondotya. Áni care ve er i paityane quenion i molir tyen.' 23 Ono i atar quente núroryannar: 'Lintave, á tala colla, i arya, ar ása panya sesse, ar á panya corma máryasse ar hyapat taluryatse, 23 ar á tala i maitana nessa mundo, áse nahta ar alve mate ar same alasse! 24 An yondonya sina náne qualin ar enutúlie coivienna; anes vanwa ar anaie hírina!' Ar *yestanelte same alasse.

17 But when he returned to keenness of perception he said: 'All the paid people that work for my father have an abundance of bread, while I am dying from famine! 18 I will rise and I will go to my father, and I will say to him: Father, I have sinned against heaven and against you. 19 I am not worthy to still be called your son, but make me like one of the paid people that work for you.'
	20 And he arose and came to his father. When he was still far away, the father saw him, and his heart went out to him, and running to him he fell upon his neck and kissed him. 21 But the son said: 'Father, I have sinned against heaven and against you. 22 I am not worthy to still be called your son. Make me like one of the paid people that work for you.' 23 But the father said to his servants: 'Quickly, bring a cloak, the best one, and put it on him, and put a ring on his hand and shoes on his feet, 23 and bring the fattened young bull, kill it and let us eat and have joy! 24 For this son of mine was dead and has come back to life; he was lost and has been found!' And they began to have joy.

25 Mal ambe yára hánorya náne i restasse, ar íre túles ar lende har i coanna, hlasses lindale ar queni liltala. 26 Yaldes er i núrion ar maquente pa mana nati sine tenger. 27 Quentes senna: 'Hánolya utúlie, ar atarelya anahtie i maitana nessa mundo, pan *nanacámies se málesse.' 28 Mal anes rúşea ar ua merne mene minna. Tá atarya túle ettenna ar arcane sello. 29 Hanquentasse quentes ataryanna: 'Ter ta rimbe loar omótien tyen, ar canwatya uan oi rance, ananta uatye oi antane nin nessa *naico samienyan alasse as meldonyar. 30 Mal íre utúlie yondotya sina ye ammante laulestatya as *imbacindeli, nahtatye i maitana mundo sen!' 
	31 Tá quentes senna: 'Hína, illume anaietye asinye, ar ilye ninyar nar *tyenyar, 32 mal mauyane same alasse ar náve valime, an sina hánotya náne qualin ar nanwenne coivienna, ar anes vanwa ar anaie hírina!”

25 But his older brother was in the field, and when he came and went near to the house, he heard music and people dancing. 26 He called one of the servants and asked about what these things meant. 27 He said to him: 'Your brother has come, and your father has killed the fattened young bull, since he received him back in good health.' 28 But he was angry and did not wish to go in. Then his father came outside and asked of him [to come]. 29 In answer he said to his father: 'Through so many years I have toiled for you, and your command I did not ever break, and yet you did not give me [even] a young goat for me to have joy with my friends. 30 But when this son of yours has come who devoured your livelihood with whores, you kill the fattened young bull for him!'
	31 Then he said to him: 'Child, you have always been with me, and all [things that are] mine are yours, 32 but it was necessary to a have joy and be glad, for this brother of yours was dead and returned to life, and he was lost and has been found!”

RANTA 16
Tá quentes yú hildoryannar: “Enge atan ye náne lárea ar sáme quén ortirila coarya, mal hlasses ulca nyarie pa se – i hatis oa armaryar. 2 Etta se-tultanes ar quente senna: 'Mana nat sina ya hláran pa lye? Á anta onótie pa molierya ve mardil, an ualye turuva i coa ambe.' 3 Tá i mardil quente insenna: 'Mana caruvan, sí íre herunya méra mapa oa molienya ve mardil? Poldorenya ua farya sapien. Nauvan nucumna qui mauya nin ique. 4 Mal istan mana caruvan, tyarila queni came ni mir coaltar íre ortírienya mapana nillo ná!' 5 Ar yalila insenna i quanda rohtalie heruryo, quentes i minyanna: 'Mana i nonwe rohtalyo herunyan?' 6 Eques: 'Lestar tuxa ilmava.' Quentes senna: 'Á mapa hyalinilyar ar hamua, ar lintiénen teca *lepenquean!'

CHAPTER 16
Then he said also to his disciples: “[There] was a man who was rich and had a person overseeing his house, but he heard a bad report about him – that he threw [Q: throws] away his goods. 2 Therefore he summoned him and said to him: 'What is this thing that I am hearing about you? Give a reckoning [or, an account] about your work as a steward, for you will not manage the house [any]more.' 3 Then the steward saod to himself: 'What am I to do, now when [/now that] my lord is wishing to take away my work [/postition] as steward? My strength does not suffice for digging. I shall be humiliated if it is necessary for me to beg. 4 But I know what I will do, causing people to receive me into their houses when my overseership is taken from me!' 5 And summoning to himself the entire group of debtors of his lord, he said to the first: 'What is the sum of your debt to my lord?' 6 He said: 'A hundred measures of oil.' He said to him: 'Take your papers and sit down, and quickly write fifty!'

 7 Epeta quentes exenna: 'Ar elye, mana i nonwe rohtalyo?' Quentes: 'Cor-lestar tuxa oriva.' Quentes senna: 'Á mapa hyalinelyar ar teca *toloquean!' 8 Ar i heru laitane i úfaila mardil, pan lenganes sailave –an *nónareltasse, randa sino yondor nar saile lá i calo yondor.
	9 Ente, quetin lenna: Cara meldor elden i úfaila larnen! Sie, íre ta loita, le-camuvalte mir i oire mardi. 10 Ye voronda ná mi ta ya ampitya ná, voronda ná yú olyasse, ar ye úfaila ná mi ta ya ampitya ná, úfaila ná yú mi olya. 11 Etta, qui ualde voronde pa i úfaila lar, man  panyuva hepieldasse ta ya nanwa ná? 12 Ar qui ualde atánie voronwelda pa ta ya ná exeva, man antauva len *aiqua ya nauva véralda?

7 Thereafter he said to another: 'And you, what is the sum of your debt?' He said: 'A hunded cor measures of grain.' He said to him: 'Take your papers and write eighty!' 8 And the lord [or, master] praised the unjust steward, since he behaved wisely – for in their generation, the sons of this age are wiser than the sons of light.
	9 Furthermore, I say to you: Make friends for yourselves with the unrighteous riches! [Q lar, singular]. Thus, when that fails, they will receive you into the eternal dwellings. 10 [One] who is faithful in that which is smallest, is faithful also in much, and the person who is unrighteous in that which is smallest, is unrighteous also in much. 11 Therefore, if you are not faithful concerning the unrighteous riches, who will put in your keeping that which is true? And if you have not shown your faithfulness concerning that which is another's, who will give you anything that is to be your own?

13 Ua ea núro yen ece náve mól heru attan, an tevuvas er ar meluva i exe, hya himyuvas er ar nattiruva i exe. Ua ece len náve móli Erun ar laren véla.”
	14 Mal i Farisar, i méler telpe, lastaner ilye sine natinnar, ar carampelte senna yaiwenen. 15 Ar quentes téna: “Elde nar i quetir i nalde faile epe atani, mal Eru ista illion enda. An ta ya varanda  ná atanin yelwa ná Erun. 16 I Şanye ar i Erutercánor náner tenna Yoháno; ho tá mo care i evandilyon sinwa, ar illi nírar sanna. 17 Menel cemenye autuvat nó erya tehta i Şanyesse lantuva oa.
	18 Ilquen ye hyare inse veriryallo ar verya exenna, race vestale, ar ye verya nissenna hyárina veruryallo, race vestale.

13 [There] is not [any] servant to whom it is possible to be a slave for two lords, for he will hate one and love the other, or he will stick to one and despise the other. It is not possible for you to be slaves for God and for riches alike.”
	14 But the Pharisees, that loved money, listened to all these things, and they spoke to him with mockery. 15 And he said to them: “You are [the ones] that say that you are just before men, but God knows the heart of all. For that which is sublime to men is disgusting to God. 16 The Law and the Prophets were until John; from then one makes the gospel known, and all are pressing towards it. 17 Heaven and earth will pass away before a single mark in the Law will fall away. 
	18 Everyone who separates himself from his wife and gets married to another, violates [lit. breaks] marriage, and [he] who gets married to a woman divorsed from her husband, violates marriage.

	19 Mal enge nér ye náne lárea, ar tompes inse *luicarninen ar *páşenen, arwa alasseo ilya auresse mi alcarinqua lé. 20 Mal enge *iquindo yeo esse náne Lásaro, panyana ara andorya, quanta sistínen. 21 Mernes quate inse yainen lantaner sarnollo i lárea nerwa, mal yando i huor túler ar láver sisteryar. 
	22 Túle in i *iquindo qualle, ar i vali colle se oa Avrahámo súmanna. Ente, yú i lárea nér qualle ar náne talaina sapsaryanna.
	23 Ar latyanes henyat mi Mandos, yasse enges ñwalmelissen, ar cennes Avraham haiya ar Lásaro sumaryasse. 24 Etta yámes ar quente: 'Atar Avraham, órava nisse ar á menta Lásaro, panieryan leperyo tille nenesse, carien lambanya ringa! An nanye ñwalyaina náre sinasse!”

	19 But [there] was a man who was rich, and he covered himself with purple and linen, having joy every day in a glorious manner. 20 But [there] was a beggar whose name was Lazarus, placed by his gate, full of ulcers. 21 He wished to fill himself with [whatever things] that fell from the rich man's table, but also [/even] the dogs came and licked his ulcers.
	22 It happened [lit. came] that the beggar died, and the angels carried him away to the bosom of Abraham. Furthermore, also the rich man died and was brought to his grave.
	23 And he opened his eyes in Mandos [here = Hades], where he existed in torments, and he saw Abraham far away and Lazarus in his bosom. 24 Therefore he cried and said: 'Father Abraham, have mercy on me and send Lazarus, for him to put the tip of his finger in water, to make my tongue cold! For I am tormented in this fire!”

25 Mal Avraham quente: “Hína, enyala i camnel máre natilyar coivielyasse, ar Lásaro mí imya lé i úmáre nati; mal sí camis tiutale sisse, mal elye same naicele. 26 Ar ara ilye nati sine, hoa cilya anaie panyana imbi elme ar elde. Sie i merir lelya silo lenna uar pole; mi imya lé queni uar pole lahta talo menna.” 27 Mal eques: “Tá arcan lyello, atar: Áse menta i coanna atarinyava – 28 an samin hánor lempe – *vettieryan tien, pustien yú té tuliello nóme sinanna ñwalmeva!” 29 Ono eque Avraham: “Samilte Móses ar i Erutercánor; á lastar téna!” 30 Mal sé quente: “Vá, atar Avraham, mal qui quén tuluva téna qualinallon, hiruvalte inwis!” 31 Ono quentes senna: “Qui ualte lasta Mósenna ar i Erutercánonnar, quén nanwenila qualinallon yú loituva vista sámalta.”

25 But Abraham said: “Child, recall that you received your good things in your life, and Lazarus in the same manner the bad things; but now he receives comfort here, but you have pain. 26 And beside all these things, a big cleft has been placed between us and you [pl.] Thus [those] that wish to go from here to you [pl.] are not able; in the same manner people are not able to pass from there to us.” 27 But he said: “Then I ask of you, father: Send him to my father's house – 28 for I have five brothers – for him to witness to them, to stop them as well from coming to this place of torment!” 29 But Abraham said: “They have Moses and the Prophets; let them listen to them!” 30 But he said: “No, father Abraham, but if a person will come to them from the dead, they will find repentance!” 31 But he said to them: “If they do not listen to Moses and the Prophets, a person returning from [the] dead will also fail to change their mind.”

RANTA 17
Tá Yésus quente hildoryannar: “Mauya i tulir i castar lantiéva, mal horro i quenen ter ye tulilte! 2 Qui ondo muliéva náne panyana *os axerya, ar anes hátina mir i ear, ta náne sen arya lá tyarie i lante ero mici pityar sine!
	3 Cima inde! Qui hánolya úcare, áse naitya, ar qui samis inwis, ásen apsene. 4 Ar qui lúr otso  mi erya aure úcaris lyenna ar nanwenis lyenna lúr otso, quetila, 'Samin inwis!', ásen apsene!
	5 Ar i aposteli quenter i Herunna: “Ámen anta amba savie!” 6 Mal i Heru quente: “Qui sámelde savie ve erde *sinapio, poldelde quete morpialda sinanna: 'Tuca ama şundulyar ar na empánina i earesse' – ar carumnes ve quetielda. 

CHAPTER 17
Then Jesus said to his disciples: “It is necessary [= unavoidable] that the reasons for falling come, but woe to the person that they come through! 2 If a stone of grinding [= a mill-stone] was put around his nect, and he was thrown into the sea, that was to him better than causing the fall of one among these little ones!
	3 Take heed of yourselves! If your brother sins, rebuke him, and if he has a change of mind, forgive him. 4 And if seven times in a single day he sins against you and he returns to you seven times, saying: 'I have a change of mind!', forgive him!
	5 And the apostles said to the Lord: “Give us more faith!” 6 But the Lord said: “If you had faith like a seed of mustard, you could say to this mulberry tree [morpialda for mor-pie-alda 'black-berry-tree]: 'Pull up your roots and be planted in the sea' – and it was going to do according to your saying.

7 Mal man mici le, arwa mólo ye mole i hyarnen hya ve mavar, quetuva senna íre tulis i restallo: 'Tula sir lintiénen ar á caita undu ara i sarno'? 8 Ma uas ambe rato quetuva senna: 'Ánin manwa nat ahtumattinyan, ar nuta *os oşwelya ar *nura nin tenna amátien ar usúcien, ar epeta elye lerta mate ar suce' – ? 9 Lau sanas i samis rohta i mólen pan é carnes i nati pa yar camnes canwali? 10 Sie yú elde: Apa acárielde ilye i nati pa yar camnelde canwali, queta: 'Nalve úaşie móli. Acárielve ya rohtalva náne.'”
	11 Ar lendaryasse Yerúsalemenna langanes ter i ende Samário ar Alileo. 12 Ar íre túles mir masto, helmahlaiwe neri quean veller se, mal pustanelte haire sello. 13 Ar ortanelte ómalta ar quente: “Yésus, *peantar, órava messe!” 14 Ar íre cennes te quentes téna: “Mena ar á tana inde i *airimoin.” Tá, íre anelte i tiesse, anelte poitaine. 

7 But who among you, having a thrall who works with the plow or as a shepherd, will say to him when he comes from the field: 'Come here quickly and lie down at the table'? 8 Will he not sooner [ambe rato, more soon = rather] say to him: 'Prepare me something for my supper, and bind around your hips and serve [or, wait on] me until I have eaten and drunk, and thereafter you may eat and drink' – ? 9 Surely he does not think that he has a debt to the thrall since he indeed did the things that he received orders about? 10 Thus also yourselves: After you have done all the things that you received orders about, say: 'We are useless slaves. We have done what our debt [or, duty] was.'  
	11 And on his journey towards Jerusalem he passed though the middle of Samaria and Galilee. 12 And when he came into a village, ten skin-diseased men met him, but they stopped far away from him. 13 And they raised their voice and said: “Jesus, teacher, have mercy on us!” 14 And when he saw them he said to them: “Go and show yourselves to the priests.” Then, as they were on the road, they were cleansed.

15 Er mici te nanwenne íre cennes i nestana náse, ar hoa ómanen antanes alcar Erun. 16 Ar lantanes cendeleryanna epe Yésuo talu ar hantane sen; anes Samárea nér. 17 Hanquentasse Yésus quente: “Ma únelte i quean nestane? Masse, tá, nar i hyane nerte? 18 Ma enge úner ye nanwenne antáven alcar Erun, hequa nér sina hyana liendello?” 19 Ar quentes senna: “Á orta ar mena; savielyanen acámiel mále.”
	20 Mal íre anes maquétina lo i Farisar pa i lúme yasse Eruo aranie tulumne, quentes téna hanquentasse: “Eruo aranie ua tule mi lé lavila quenin cenitas hendultanten. 21 Ente, queni uar quetuva: 'Cena sisse!' hya 'Tasse!' An yé, Eruo aranie ea endeldasse.”
	22 Tá quentes i hildonnar: “Tuluvar aureli yassen meruvalde cene er i aurion i Atanyondova, mal ualde cenuva sa. 23 Ar queni quetuvar lenna: 'Cena tasse!', hya: 'Cena sisse!' Áva lelya tar ar áva nore ca te.

15 One among them returned when he saw that he was [Q: is] healed, and in a great voice he gave glory to God. 16 And he fell upon his face before Jesus' feet and thanked him; he was a Samaritan man. 17 In answer Jesus said: “Were not the ten healed? Where, then, are the other nine? 18 Was there no man who returned to give glory to God, except this man from another nation?” 19 And he said to him: “Rise and go; by your faith you have received health.”
	20 But when he was asked by the Pharisees about the time when [yasse = in which] God's kingdom was going to come, he said to them in answer: “God's kingdom does not come in a manner allowing people to see it with their eyes. 21 Furthermore, people will not say: 'See here!' or 'There!' For behold, God's kingdom exists in your midst.”
	22 Then he said to the disciples: “[There] will come days when you will wish to see one of the days of the Son of Man, but you will not see it. 23 And people will say to you: 'See there!' or 'See here!' Do not go there and do not run behind them.

24 An ve i íta, caltala er rantallo nu menel hyana rantanna nu menel, sie i Atanyondo nauva. 25 Mal minyave mauya sen perpere ole ar náve quérina oa lo *nónare sina. 26 Ente, tambe martane auressen Noaħo, síve euva yú mí Atanyondo rí: 27 Mantelte, suncelte, neri veryaner, nissi náner vertane, tenna i aure yasse Noaħ mittane i marcirya, ar i oloire túle ar nancarne te illi. 28 Mí imya lé, ve martane auressen Loto: mantelte, suncelte, mancanelte, vancelte, empannelte, carastanelte. 29 Mal i auresse yasse Lót ettúle Soromello, náre ar *ussar lantaner menello ar nancarne te illi. 30 Mí imya lé euva íre i Atanyondo nauva apantana.
	31 Enta auresse mauya i quenen tópasse coaryava, ye same armaryar i coasse, lá mene undu tultien tai, ar mi imya lé mauya i quenen i restasse lá nanwene i natinnar ca se. 

24 For like the flash [= lightening], shining from one part under heaven to another part under heaven, so the Son of Man will be. 25 But firstly it is necessary for him to suffer much and to be turned away by this generation. 26 Furthermore, like it happened in the days of Noah, so it will be also in the days of the Son of Man: 27 They ate, they drank, men married, women were given in marriage, until the day when Noah entered the ark, and the flood came and destroyed them all. 28 In the same manner, as it happened in the days of Lot: they ate, they drank, they traded, they bought, they planted, they built. 29 But on the day when Lot went out from Sodom, fire and brimstone fell from heaven and destroyed them all. 30 In the same manner it will be when the Son of Man shall be revealed.
	31 In that day it is necessary for the person on top of his house, who has his goods in the house, not to go down to fetch them, and int he same manner it is necessary for the person in the field not to return to the things behind him.

32 Enyala Lóto veri! 33 Aiquenen ye cesta hepe cuilerya nauvas vanwa, mal quén yen nas vanwa rehtuva sa. 34 Nyarin lenna: Mi enta lóme atta euvat er caimasse; er nauva talana, mal i exe nauva hehtana. 35 Euva nís atta mulila i imya *mulmanen; er nauva talana, mal i exe nauva hehtana. [36] 37 Ar hanquentasse quentelte senna: “Masse, Heru?” Quentes téna: “Yasse i hroa ea, tasse i şorni ocomuvar.”

32 Recall the wife of Lot! 33 To anyone who seeks to keep his life it will be lost, but a person it is lost to, will save it. 34 I tell you: In that night two will be in one bed; one will be brought [along], but the other will be abandoned. 35 [There] will be two women grinding on the same mill; one will be brought along, but the other will be abandoned. [36] 37 And in answer they said to him: “Where, Lord?” He said to them: “Where the body is, there the eagles will gather.”

RANTA 18
Tá nyarnes tien sestie pa i maure hyamiéva ar lá pustiéva neve, 2 quetila: “Ostosse enge námo ye ua sáme rucie Eruva ar ua sáme áya atanen. 3 Mal enge *verulóra nís sana ostosse ar túles i námonna, quetila: “Ánin anta failie cotumonyallo şanyesse!”

CHAPTER 18
Then he told them a comparision about the need of praying and not stop trying, 2 saying: “In a city [there] was a judge who did nto have fear of God and did not have respect for [any] man. 3 But [there] was a widowed woman in that city and she came to the judge, saying: “Give me justice from my opponent at law!”

4 Mal ter lúme uas merne, mal epeta quentes insenna: “Ómu uan ruce Erullo hya same áya atanen, 5 en taluvan failie nís sinan, hya tuluvas ni-petien i cendelesse!” 6 Tá i Heru quente: “Hlara ya úfaila námo sina quéta! 7 Ma Eru ua tyaruva failie náve carna in icílies i yamir senna mi aure yo lóme, ómu samis cóle pa te? 8 Nyarin lenna, antauvas tien failie rongo! Ananta, íre i Atanyondo tuluva, ma hiruvas i savie cemende?”
	9 Yú quentes sestie sina innar náner tance pa véra failielta ar nonter i exi ve munta: 10 “Nér atta lendet ama mir i corda hyamien. Er náne Farisa ar er náne *tungwemo. 

4 But for [ter, through] a time he did not want, but thereafter he said to himself: “Though I do not fear God or have respect for [any] man, 5 I will still bring justice to this woman, or she will come and strike me in the face!” 6 Then the Lord said: “Hear what this unjust judge is saying! 7 Will God not cause justice to be done to those that he has chosen that cry to him at day and night, though he has patience concerning them? 8 I tell you, he will give them justice soon! And yet, when the Son of Man shall come, will he find the faith on earth?””
	9 He also spoke this comparison to [those] that were certain about their own justice and counted the others as nothing: 10 “Two men went up into the temple to pray. One was a Pharisee and one was a tax collector. 

11 I Farisa tarne eressea ar hyamne sie: 'A Eru, antan lyen hantale pan uan ve hyane atani, pilur, úfailar, queni i racir vestale, hya ve *tungwemo sina. 12 Hepin lamate lú atta i otsolasse, ar ilye nation yar ñetin antan quaista.' 13 Mal i *tungwemo yando ua merne orta henduryat menelenna, mal palpanes ambostya, quetila: 'A Eru, órava nisse, úcarindo!' 14 Quétan lenna: Nér sina lende maranna nála faila lá i exe, an ilquen ye orta inse nauva nucumna, mal ye nucume inse nauva orhálina.”
	15 Sí queni taller senna vinimoltar appieryan te, mal íre i hildor cenner sa, naicineltet. 16 Mal Yésus yalde te ar quente: “Lava i hínain tule ninna, ar áva pusta te, an Eruo aranie taitin ná. 17 Násie quetin lenna: Aiquen ye ua came Eruo aranie ve hína, laume tuluva mir sa.”

11 The Pharisee stood alone and prayed thus: 'O God, I give you thanks since I am not like other men, robbers, unrighteous ones, people who violate marriage, or like this tax collector. 12 I keep fast two times in a week, and of all things that I get I give a tenth [/tithes].' 13 But the tax collector also [/even] did not wish to raise his eyes towards heaven, but he beat his breast, saying: 'O God, have mercy on me, a sinner!' 14 I say to you: This man went home being more righteous than the other, for everyone that exalts himself will be humbled, but  who humbles himself will be exalted.”
	15 Now people brought to him their babies for him to touch them, but when the disciples saw it, they rebuked them. 16 But Jesus called them and said: “Allow the children to come to me, and do not stop them, for God's kingdom is for suchlike ones. Truly I say to you: Anyone who does not receive God's kingdom as a child [does], will by no means come into it.”

	18 Ar er i cánoron maquente senna: “Mane *peantar, mana caruvan náve aryon oira coiviéno?” 19 Yésus quente senna: “Manen ná i estal ní mane? *Úquen ná mane hequa er, Eru. 20 Istal i canwar: Áva race vestale. Áva nahta. Áva pile. Áva *vetta hurunen. Á anta alcar atarelyan ar amillelyan.” 21 Tá quentes: “Ilye nati sine ehépien et néşello.” 23 Hlarila ta, Yésus quente senna: “Ea en er nat ya penil. Vaca ilqua ya samil ar etsata i telpe penyain, ar samuval harma menelde; tá tula ar áni hilya.” 23 Íre hlasses ta, sámes tumna nyére, an anes ita lárea. 
	24 Yésus yente se ar quente: “Manen urda ná in samir telpe tule mir Eruo aranie! 25 É ulumpen autie ter nelmo assa ná *aşcárima lá tulie mir Eruo aranie lárea quenen.”

	18 And one of the rulers said asked him: “Good teacher, what am I to do to be heir to eternal life?” 19 Jesus said to him: “How is [it] that you call me good? No one is good except one, God. 20 You know the commandments: Do not violate [lit. break] marriage. Do not kill. Do not steal. Do not witness with a lie. Give glory to your fatehr and to your mother.” 21 Then he said: “All these things I have kept from youth.” 23 Hearing that, Jesus said to him: “[There] is still one thing that you lack. Sell everything that you have and distribute the money to poor ones, and you will have a treasure in heaven; then come and follow me.” 23 When he heard that, he had deep grief, for he was very rich.
	24 Jesus look at him and said: “How difficult [it] is for [those] that have money to come into God's kingdom! Indeed for a camel to pass through a needle's eye [lit. hole] is easier than coming into God's kingdom for a rich person!”

26 I hlasser ta quenter: “Tá man pole náve rehtaina?” 27 Eques: “I úcárimar atanin nar cárime Erun.” 28 Mal eque Péter: “Yé, ehehtielme vére natilmar ar ihílier lye.” 29 Quentes téna: “Násie quetin lenna, ea úner ye ehehtie coa hya veri hya hánor hya nostaru Eruo aranien 30 ye ua camuva nan rimbe lúli ambe lúme sinasse, ar i tuluvaila randasse oira coivie.”
	31 Tá talles i yunque oa véra nómenna ar quente téna: “Yé! Ménalve ama Yerusalemenna, ar ilye i nati técine lo i Erutercánor pa i Atanyondo nauvar telyaine. 32 An nauvas antana ollo quenin i liendion ar perperuva yaiwe ar orme, ar mo pişuva senna, 33 ar apa riptie se nahtuvaltes, mal i neldea auresse ortuvas.” 34 Mal hanyanelte munta sine nation, mal quetie sina náne nurtaine tello, ar ualte sinte i nati quétine.

26 [Those] that heard that said: “Then who can be saved?” 27 He said: “The impossible things to men are possible to God.” 28 But Peter said: “Behold, we have abandoned our own things and have followed you.” 29 He said to him: “Truly I say to you, there is no man who has abandoned house or wife or brothers or parents for [the sake of] God's kingdom 30 who will not receive back many times more in this time, and in the coming age eternal life.”
	31 Then he brought the twelve away to a private place and said to them: “Behold! We are going up to Jerusalem, and all the things written by the prophets about the Son of Man will be completed. 32 For he will be given over to people of the nations and will suffer mockery and violence, and one will spit upon him, and after flaying him they will kill him, but on the third day he will rise.” 34 But they understood nothing of these things, but this saying was hidden from them, and they did not know the things said.

	35 Sí, íre túles har Yericonna, *cénelóra nér hamne ara i malle, iquila. 36 Pan hlasses i şanga léva, maquentes pa mana si tenge. 37 Nyarnelte sen: “Yésus Násaretello langea!” 38 Ar yámes, quetila: “Yésus Lávirion, órava nisse!” 39 Ar i lender opo Yésus naiciner se, náveryan quilda, mal ta ita ambe yámes: “Lávirion, órava nisse!” 10 Tá Yésus pustane ar canne i tulyumnelte i ner senna. Apa túles hare, Yésus quente: 41 “Mana meril i caruvan lyen?” Eques: “Heru, ánin lave came *céne!” 42 Ar eque Yésus: “Cama *céne; savielyanen acámiel *céne.” 43 Ar mi imya lú camnes *céne, ar hilyanes Yésus, antala alcar Erun. Ar i quanda lie, cenila ta, antane laitale Erun.

	35 Now, when he came near to Jericho, a blind man sat by the road, begging. 36 Since he hard the crowd on the move, he asked about what this meant. 37 They told him: “Jesus from Nazareth is passing by!” 38 And he cried [out], saying: “Jesus son of David, have mercy on me!” 39 And those that went in front of Jesus rebuked him, for him to be silent, but that much more he cried: “Son of David, have mercy on me!” 10 Then Jesus stopped and commanded that they were to bring the man to him. After he came near, Jesus said: 41 “What do you want that I am to do for you?” He said: “Lord, allow me to receive sight!” 42 And Jesus said: “Receive sight; by your faith you have received sight.”43 And in the same moment he received sight, and he followed Jesus, giving glory to God. And the entire people, seeing that, gave praise to God.

RANTA 19 
Ar íre túles mir i osto, lendes ter Yerico. 2 Ar enge tasse nér yeo esse náne Saccaio, ar anes héra *tungwemo ar lárea. 3 Ar néves cene Yésus, mal uas polde i şanyenen, an únes halla.
	4 Ar norila nóvo nómenna epe te, rentes mir vilwarinda alda, cenien se, an Yésus langumne sana nóme. 5 Ar íre túles tar, Yésus yente ama ar quente: “Sakkaio, tula undu lintiénen, an síra mauya nin lemya coalyasse!” 6 Ar túles lintave undu ar camne se mi alasse. 7 Ar íre illi cenner sa, anelte nurrula, quetila: “As nér ye ná úcarindo lendes minna matien.” 8 Mal Saccaio oronte ar quente i Herunna: “Yé, i perta armanyaron antauvan i penyain, ar qui maustanen nampen telpe ho aiquen, antauvan nan lúr canta i nonwe!”

CHAPTER 19
And when he came into the city, he went through Jericho. And [there] was there a man whose name was Zacchaeus, and he was a chief tax collector and rich. 3 And he tried to see Jesus, but he could not because of the crowd, and he was not tall.
	4 And running beforehand to a place before them, he climbed into a sycamore tree, to see him, for Jesus was going to pass by that place. 5 And when he came thither, Jesus looked up and said: “Zacchaeus, come down quickly [lit. with speed], for today it is necessary for me to stay in your house!” 6 And he came quickly down and received him with [lit. in] joy. 7 And when all saw it, they were murmuring, saying: “With a man who is a sinner he went in to eat.” 8 But Zacchaeus arose and said to the Lord: “Behold, half of my goods I will give to the poor, and if by compulsion I took money from anyone, I will give back four times the sum!”

9 Tá Yésus quente senna: “Síra rehtie utúlie coa sinanna, an yú isse Avraham yondo ná. 10 An i Atanyondo túle cestien ar rehtien ya náne vanwa.”
	11 Íre lastanelte sine natinnar yú quentes téna sestie, pan anes hare Yerúsalemenna, ar sannelte i Eruo aranie tanumne insa tasse ar tá. 12 Etta quentes: “Nér, aryon, lelyumne haira nórenna camien aranie ar epeta nanwenien. 13 Yaldes móli quean ar antane tien minar quean ar canne tien: 'Á manca tainen tenna tuluvan.' 14 Mal nóreryo queni téver se ar mentaner ca se ennoli i 
carpumner tien, quetien: 'Ualme mere nér sina ve aran or me.'
	15 Ar túle íre nanwennes, apa camie i aranie, i cannes i yalumnelte senna móli sine in antanes i telpe, istieryan mana ñentelte mancalénen.

9 Then Jesus said to him: “Today salvation has come to this house, for also he is a son of Abraham. 10 For the Son of Man came to seek and to save [that] which was lost.”
	11 While they listened to these things he also told them a comparison, since he was near to Jerusalem, and they thought that God's kingdom was going to show itself there and then. 12 Therefore he said: “A man, an heir, was going to travel to a remote land to receive a kingdom and thereafter to return. 13 He called ten servants and gave them ten minas and commanded them: 'Trade with them until I shall come.' 14 But people of his land hated him and sent behind him people that were going to speak for them, to say: 'We do not want this man as king over us.'
	15 And [it] happened [lit. came] when he returned, after receiving the kingdom, that he commanded that they were to call to him these thralls that he gave the money to, for him to know what they got by trade.

16 Tá i minya túle ar quente: “Heru, minalya ñente minar quean!” 17 Etta quentes senna: “Mai carna, mára mól! Pan anaiel voronda mí ampitya nat, sama túre or ostor quean.” 18 Ar i attea túle, quetila: “Minalya, heru, carne minar lempe!” 19 Quentes yú nér sinanna: 'Tá elye tura ostor lempe!' 20 Mal i exe túle, quetila: 'Heru, sisse ea minalya, ya ehépien caitala mi lanne. 21 An runcen lyello, pan nalye naraca nér; mapal ama ya ual panyane undu ar *cirihtal ya ual rende.' 22 Quentes senna: “Et véra antolyallo náman lye, olca mól! Sintel i nanye naraca nér ye mapa ya uan panyane undu ar *cirihta ya uan rende? 23 Tá manen ná i ual panya telpenya sarnosse? Tá, íre túlen, camumnenyes as napánina nonwe.'

16 Then the first came and said: “Lord, your mina gained ten minas!” 17 Therefore he said to him: “Well done, good slave! Since you have been faithful in the smallest thing, have power over ten cities.” 18 And the second came, saying: “Your mina, lord, made five minas!” 19 He said also to this man: 'Then you rule five cities!' 20 But the other came, saying: 'Lord, here is your mina, which I have kept lying in a cloth. 21 For I feared you, since you are a harsh man; you take up what you did not put down and you reap what you did not sow.' 22 He said to him: 'Out of your own mouth I am judging you, wicked slave! You knew that I am a harsh man who take up what I did not put down and reap what I did not sow? 23 Then how is [it] that you did not put my money on a table? Then, when I came, I was going to receive it with an added sum.'

	24 Ar quentes innar tarner ara se: 'Á mapa i mina sello ar ása anta yen same i minar quean!' 25 Mal quentelte senna: 'Heru, samis minar quean!' 26 'Quetin lenna: Ilquenen ye same, amba nauva antana, mal yen ua same, yando ya samis nauva mapana oa. 27 Ente, ñottonyar sine i uar merne ni ve aranelta – áte tala sir ar áte nahta epe hendunyat!'”
	28 Sie, apa quentes nati sine, lendes opo te Yerúsalemenna. 29 Ar íre túles har Vet-Fahenna ar Vetanianna i orontesse estaina Oron *Milloaldaron, etementanes atta i hildoron, 30 quetila: “Mena mir i osto epe let! Íre tuliste tar, hiruvaste *pellope nútina, yesse *úquen atanion oi ahámie. Áse lehta ar áse tala! 31 Mal qui aiquen quete lenta: 'Mana castasta lehtien se?', aste quete: I Heru same maure seva.”

	24 And he said to those that stood by him: 'Take the mina from him and give it to [the one] who has the ten minas!' 25 But they said to him: 'Lord, he has ten minas!' 26 'I say to you: To everyone that has, more will be given, but to [the one] that does not have, also what he has will be taken away. 27 Furthermore, these enemies of mine that did not want me as their king – bring them here and slay them before my eyes!'”
	28 Thus, after he said these things, he went in front of them towards Jerusalem. 29 And when he came near to Bethphage and Bethany on the mountain called Mount of Olives, he sent froth two of the disciples, 30 saying: “Go into the city before you! [dual] When you [dual] come thither, you will find a colt bound, that no one has ever sat upon. Loose it and bring it! 31 But if anyone says to you: 'What is your reason for loosing it?', you are to say: The Lord has need of it.”

32 Ar i nánet etementaine hirnet se aqua ve quentes túna. 33 Mal íre lehtanette i *pellope, i haryaner se quenter túna: “Mana castasta lehtien i *pellope?” 34 Quentette: “I Heru same maure seva.” 35 Ar tulyanettes Yésunna, ar hantette collattar i *pellopenna ar panyanet Yésus sesse.
	36 Mi levierya ompa queni pantaner collaltar i mallesse. 37 Íre túles har i pendenna undu Orontello *Milpieron i quanda liyúme i hildoron *yestaner same alasse ar laita Eru pa ilye i túrie cardar yar cennelte, 38 quetila: “Aistana ná ye túla, i Aran, mí Héruo esse. Raine menelde, ar alcar i tarmenissen!” 39 Mal ennoli i Farisaron i şangallo quenter senna: “*Peantar, á naitya hildolyar!” 40 Mal hanquentasse quentes: “Nyarin lenna: Qui queni sine náner quilde, i sarni yamumner!”

32 And [the two] that were sent forth found it just as he said to them [dual]. 33 But when they loosed the cold, [those] that owned it said to them: “What is your reason for loosing the colt?” 34 They said: “The Lord has need of it.” 35 And they led it to Jesus, and they threw their cloaks upon the colt and put Jesus on it.
	36 As he moved [lit. in his moving] forward people spread their cloaks on the road. 37 When he came near to the decline down from the Mount of Olives the entire host of the disciples began to have joy and to praise God concerning all the mighty deeds that they saw, 38 saying: “Blessed is [he] who is coming, the King, in the name of the Lord. Peace on earth, and glory in the high places!” 39 But some of the Pharisees from the crowd said to him: “Teacher, rebuke your disciples!” 40 But in answer he said: “I tell you: If these people were silent, the stones would cry [out]!”

41 Ar íre túles har ar cenne i osto, níeryar uller san, 42 ar quentes: “Nai elye sinte mi aure sina yar tulyar rainenna! Mal sí anaielte nurtaine hendulyalto. 43 An tuluvar aureli yassen ñottolyar peluvar lye caraxenen ar niruvar lyenna ilye tiellon, 44 ar hatuvalte lyé ar hínalyar talamenna, ar ualte lavuva ondon lemya ondosse lyesse, pan ualye sinte i lúme yasse anel céşina!”
	45 Ar tulila mir i corda *yestanes et-hate i vancer, 46 quetila téna: “Anaie técina: 'Ar coanya nauva coa hyamiéva', mal elde carir sa felya piluron!”
	47 Ar peantanes ilya auresse i cordasse. Mal i hére *airimor ar i parmagolmor ar i lieo mindar cestaner nancare se, 48 ananta ualte hirne mana carumnelte, an i quanda lie himyane se lastien.

41 And when he came near and saw the city, his tears flowed for it, 42 and he said: “Would that you knew in this day [the things] that lead to peace! But now they have been hidden from your eyes [dual]. 43 For [there] will come days when your enemies will surround you with a palisade and will press towards you from all directions, 44 and they will throw you and your children to earth, and they will not allow [any] stone to remain upon a stone in you, since you did not know the time when you were inspected!”
	45 And coming into the temple he began to throw out [those] who sold [things], 46 saying to them: “It has been written: 'And my house will be a house of prayer', but you make it a cave of robbers!”
	47 And he taught every day in the temple. But the chielf priests and the scribes and the prominent ones of the people sought to destroy him, 48 and yet they did not find what to do [lit. what they were going to do], for the entire people stuck to him to listen.

RANTA 20
Ar martane mi er i aurion, íre sé peantane i lien i cordasse ar carne i evandilyon sinwa, i túler senna i hére *airimor ar i amyárar 2 ar quenter senna: “Queta men mana túrenen cáral nati sine, ar man ánie lyen túre sina!” 3 Hanquentasse quentes téna: “Yú inye maquetuva lenna pa nat, ar alde hanquete ninna: 4 Yoháno *tumyale, ma anes et menello hya atanillon?” 5 Té caramper mici inte ar quenter: “Qui quetilve: Et menello, quetuvas: Tá manen ná i ualde sáve sesse? 6 Mal qui quetilve: Atanillon, i quanda lie vi-nahtuva sarninen, an savilte tancave i Yoháno náne Erutercáno.” 7 Sie quentelte in ualte ista. 8 Ar eque Yésus: “Tá yú inye ua quetuva lenna mana túrenen carin nati sine.”
	9 Ar *yestanes quete sestie sina i lienna: “Nér empanne tarwa liantassion ar láver *alamolin *yuhta sa telpen, ar lendes hyana nórenna anda lúmen. 

CHAPTER 20
And it happened in one of the days, when he instructed the people in the temple and made the gospel known, that [there] came to him the chief priests and the elders 2 and said to him: “Say us by [-nen] what authority you are doing these things, and who has given you this authority!” 3 In answer he said to them: “I too will ask you about [some]thing, and you answer me: 4 John's baptism, was it out of heaven or from men?” 5 They spoke among themselves and said: “If we say: Out of heaven, he will say: Then how is [it] that you did not believe in him? 6 But if we say: From men, the entire people will kill us with stones, for they believe firmly that John was a prophet.” 7 Thus they said that they did not [Q: do not] know. 8 And Jesus said: “Then I as well will not tell you by what authority I to these things.”
	9 And he began to speak this comparison to the people: “A man planted a garden of vines and allowed some cultivators to use it for money, and he went to another land for a long time.

	10 Ar íre i lúme túle, mentanes mól i *alamonnar, antieltan sen i yáveo i tarwallo liantassion. Mal i *alamor, apa palpie se, mentaner se oa lusta. 11 Mal mentanes yú hyana mól. Yú sé mentanelte oa, palpiéla se ar nucúmiéla se. 12 Ananta ata mentanes neldea; yú sé hantelte ettenna, harniéla se. 13 Tá quente i heru ye sáme i tarwa lantassion: 'Mana caruvan? Mentuvan melda yondonya; sen samuvalte áya.' 14 Íre i *alamor cenner se, carampelte mici inte ar quenter: 'Ta ná i aryon! Alve nahta se, ar elme haryuvar masserya!' 15 Ar hanteltes et i tarwallo lantassion ar nacanter se. Tá mana caruva i heru ye same i tarwa? 16 Tuluvas ar metyuva tane *alamor ar antauva i tarwa exelin.” Íre hlasselte ta, quentelte: “Nai uas oi martuva!”

	10 And when the time came, he sent a slave to the cultivators, for them to give him of the fruit from the garden of vines. But the cultivators, after beating him, sent him away empty. 11 But he sent also another slave. Him as well they sent away, after beating him and humiliating him. 12 And yet he again sent a third; him as well they threw outside, after wounding him. 13 Then the lord who had the garden of wines said: 'What am I to do? I will send my beloved son; for him they will have awe.' 14 When the cultivators saw him, they spoke among themselves and said: 'That is the heir! Let us kill him, and we will possess his portion!' 15 And they threw him out of the garden of vines and killed him. Then what will the lord who has the garden do? 16 He will come and put an end to those cultivators and will give the garden to others.” When they heard that, they said: “May it not ever happen!”

17 Mal ata yenteset ar quente: “Tá mana tea nat sina ya ná técina: 'I ondo ya i şamnor querner oa, sá anaie carna cas i vinco' – ? 18 Ilquen ye lanta tana ondonna nauva rácina. Aiquen yenna lantas, ascatuvas se.” 19 Ar i parmangolmor ar i hére *airimor cestaner panya máltat senna yana lúmesse, mal runcelte i liello. An hanyanelte i nyarnes sestie sina pa té. 20 Ar apa tirneltes harive mentanelte nelli i nuldave camner telpe lengien ve qui anelte faile, nevien mapa se questasse, antieltan se oa in turner ar i mir i nórecáno túre. 21 Ar maquentelte senna: “*Peantar, istalme i quetil ar peantal ve nanwa ná, ar ua valda lyen man quén ná, mal peantal Eruo malle i nanwiénen. 22 Ma lertalve paitya *tungwe i Ingaranen hya lá?” 

17 But again he looked at them and said: “Then what does this thing mean that is written: 'The stone which the builders turned away, it has been made head of the corner' – ? 18 Everyone that falls against that stone will be broken. Anyone upon whom it falls, it will smash him.” 19 And the scribes and the chief priests sought to put their hands upon him in that hour, but they feared the people. For they understood that he told this comparison about them. 20 And after they watched him closely they sent some men [ner-li > nelli] that secretly received money to behave as if they were just, to try to catch him in speech, for them to give him over to those who ruled and into the power of the governor. 21 And they asked him: “Teacher, we know that you speak and teach as is true, and it is not important to you who a person is, but you teach God's way by the truth. 22 May we pay tax to the High King or not?”

23 Mal túnes curulta ar quente téna: 24 “Ánin tana lenár. Mano emma ar tecie samis?” Quentelte: “I ingarano.” 25 Ar quentes téna; “Alde anta nan, tá, i Ingarano nati i Ingaranen, ar Eruo nati Erun.” 26 Ar ua ence tien mapa se mi quetie sina epe i lie, mal quentelte munta, elmendasse hanquentaryanen.
	27 Mal ennoli i Farisaron, i quetir i ua ea enortie, túler ar maquenter senna: 28 “*Peantar, Móses etécie men: 'Qui nero háno quale ú híno, apa veryanes nís, mauya hánoryan verya i nissenna ar orta erde hánoryan.' 29 Mal enger hánor otso, ar i minya veryane nissenna, ono qualle ú híno. 30 Yú i attea 31 ar i neldea veryaner senna, mí imya lé ilye i otso ú híno hilien te, ar quallelte. 32 Mí metta yú i nís qualle. 33 Mano veri tá nauvas i enortiesse? An anes veri ilye i otson.”

23 But he perceived their cunning and said to them: 24 “Show me a denarius. Whose picture and writing does it have?” They said: “The High King's.” 25 And he saiad to them: “You are to give back, then, the High King's things to the High King, and God's things to God.” 26 And it was not possible for them to seize him in this saying before the people, but they said nothing, in wonder at [-nen] his answer.
	27 But some of the Pharisees, that say that [there] is not [any] resurrection, came and said to him: 28 “Teacher, Moses has written for us: 'If a man's brother dies without child, after he married a woman, it is necessary for his brother to get married to the woman and rise up seed for his brother.' 29 But [there] were seven brothers, and the first got married to a woman, but died without child. 30 Also the second 31 and the third got married to her, in the same manner all the seven without a child to follow them, and they died. 32 In the end also the woman died. 33 Whose wife will she then be in the resurrection? For she was a wife for all the seven.”

34 Yésus quente téna: “Randa sino hínar veryar ar nar vertaine, 35 mal i nar nótine valdie ceniéno enta randa ar i enortien qualinallon uar verya hya nar vertane. 36 Ente, ualte pole ambe quale, an nalte ve vali, pan nalte Eruo híni návenen i enortiéno híni. 37 Mal yú Móses tanne i qualinar nar ortane, i nyarnasse i neceltusso, íre estas i Héru Aino Avrahámo ar Aino Ísaco ar Aino Yácovo. 38 Uas qualinaron Aino, mal coivearon, an illi mici te nar coivie sen.” 39 Hanquentasse ennoli i parmangolmoron quenter: “*Peantar, carampel mai!” 40 An ualte ambe varyane maquete senna erya maquetie.

34 Jesus said to them: “The children of this age marry and are given in marriage, 35 but [those] that are counted worthy of seeing that age and for the resurrection from the dead do not marry or are given in marriage. 36 Furthermore, they cannot [any]more die, for they are like angels, since they are children of God by being children of the resurrection. 37 But also Moses showed  that [the] dead are raised, in the story about the thorn-bush, when he calls the Lord Abraham's God and Isaac's God and Jacob's God. 38 He is not God of [the] dead, but of living ones, for all among them are alive to him.” 39 In answer some of the scribes said: “Teacher, you spoke well!” 40 And they did not [any]more dare to ask him a single question.

	41 Mal quentes téna: “Manen ná i queni quetir in i Hristo Láviro yondo ná? 42 An Lávir immo quete i parmasse airilírion: I Héru quente herunyanna: Hara ara formanya, 43 tenna panyuvan ñottolyar nu talulyat. 44 Sie Lávir esta se heru. Tá manen náse yondorya?” 
	45 Íre i quanda lie lastane, quentes hildoryannar: 46 “Tira inde i parmangolmoin i merir vanta mi larmar ar melir *suilier i mancanómessen ar i minya sondar i *yomencoassen ar i minde nómi i ahtumattissen, 47 ar i ammatir i coar *verulóraiva ar hyamir ande hyamier náven cénine lo exi. Té camuvar ambe lunga namie.” 

41 But he said to them: “How is [it] that people say that the Christ is David's son? 42 For David himself says in the book of psalms [airilírion = of holy songs]: The Lord said to my lord: Sit by my right hand, 43 until I shall put your enemies under your feet. 44 Thus David calls him lord. Then how is he his son?” 45 While the entire people listened, he said to his disciples: 46 “Watch yourselves because of the scribes that wish to walk [around] in robes and live greetings in the market places and the first seats in the synagogues and the prominent places at the suppers, 47 and that devour the houses of widows and pray long prayes to be seen by others. They will receive a heavier judgement.”

RANTA 21 
Sí íre yentes cennes i lárear panyea annaltar i harwessen. 2 Tá cennes penya *verulóra nís ye minahante pitye urustamitta atta, 3 ar eques: “Nyarin len násie: Penya *verulóra nís sina antane amba lá te illi. 4 An illi sine antaner annar et úveltallo, mal nís sina antane i quanda laulesta ya sámes.”

CHAPTER 21
Now when he looked he saw the rich putting their gifts in the treasuries. 2 Then he saw a poor widowed woman who threw in two small copper pieces, 3 and he said: “I tell you truly: This poor widowed woman gave more than them all. 4 For all these [people] gave gifts out of their abundance, but this woman gave the entire livelihood that she had.”

	5 Ar íre ennoli caramper pa i corda, i samis írime ondor ar netyana annainen ná, quentes: 6 “Nati sine yar yétalde – aureli tuluvar yassen ondo ua lemyuva ondosse ya ua nauva hátina undu.”
	7 Ar maquentelte senna: “*Peantar, mana i lú yasse nati sine euvar, ar mana i tanwa i nati sine rato martuvar?” 8 Ar eques: “Cima i ualde nauva tyárine ranya! An rimbali tuluvar essenyasse, quetila: Inye sé!, ar: I lúme hare ná. Áva lelya ca te! 9 Ente, íre hlarilde pa ohtali ar amortiéli, áva na ruhtaine! An mauya i nati sine tuluvar minyave, mal i metta ua tule mí imya lúme.”
	
	5 And when some talked about the temple, that it had  [Q: has] lovely stones and was [Q: is] adorned with gifts, he said: 6 “These things that you behold – days will come when stone will not remain upon a stone that will not be thrown down.”
	7 And they asked him: “Teacher, what is the time when these things will be, and what [is] the sign that these things will soon happen?” 8 And he said: “Take heed that you will not be caused to stray! For numerous ones will come in my name, saying: I am he!, and: The time is near. Do not go after [lit. behind] them! 9 Furthermore, when you hear about wars and uprisings, do not be terrified! For it is necessary that these things will come first, but the end does not come at the same time.
	
	10 Tá quentes téna: “Liende ortuva liendenna ar aranie aranienna, 11 ar euvar *cempaliéli, ar mi nóme apa nóme quolúviéli ar saiceléli, ar euvar rúcime natali cénine, ar menello túre tanwali. 
	12 Mal nó ilye nati sine queni panyuvar máltat lesse ar roituvar le, antala le olla i *yomencoain ar i mandoin, íre nalde túcine epe arani ar nórecánor pa essenya. 13 Ta nauva len ecie *vettien. 14 Etta na tance endaldasse i ualde caruva panor nóvo pa manen quetuvalde inden, 15 an inye antauva len anto ar sailie yanna ilye cotumaldar uar poluva tare hya quete. 16 Ente, nauvalde antane olla yando lo nostaru ar lo hánor ar lo nosselda ar lo meldor, ar nahtuvalte ennoli mici le, 17 ar nauvalde tévine lo illi essenyanen. 18 Ananta fine careldasse laume nauva nancarna. 19 Voronweldanen rehtuvalde coivieldar. 

	10 Then he said to them: “Nation will rise against nation and kingdom against kingdom, 11 and there will be earthquakes, and in place after place pestilences and famines, and [there] will be terrible things seen, and from heaven great signs.
	12 But before all these things people will put their hands [dual] on you and will persecute you, giving you over to the synagogues and to the prisons, when you are drawn before kings and governors concerning my name. 13 That will be for you an opportunity for witnessing. 14 Therefore be firm in your heart that you will not make plans beforehand about how you will speak for yourselves, 15 for I shall give you a mouth and wisdom against which all [of] your enemies will not be able to stand or speak. 16 Furthermore, you will be given over by parents [dual] and by brothers and by your kin and by friends, and they will kill some among you, 17 and you will be hated by all because of [-nen] my name. 18 And yet a hair on your head will by no means be destroyed. 19 By your faithfulness you will save your lives. 

	20 Ente, íre cenuvalde Yerúsalem pélina lo hosseli, á ista i nancarierya utúlie har. 21 Tá mauya in ear Yúreasse uşe i orontinnar, ar mauya in ear i osto endesse auta, ar in ear i ménassen lá mitta sa, 22 an ente rí nar rí ahtariéva, carien anwe ilye nati yar anaier técine. 23 Horro i nissin as hina ar in *tyetir vinimor ente auressen! An tuluva túra maure i nóresse ar orme lie sinanna, 24 ar lantuvalte i macilden ar nauvar tulyaine oa mir ilye liendi, ar Yerúsalem nauva *vattaina nu talu lo ilye i liendi, tenna i liendion lúmi nauvar telyane.

	20 Furthermore, when you shall see Jerusalem surrounded by armies, know that her destruction has come near. 21 Then it is necessary for [those] that are in Judea to flee to the mountains, and for [those] that are in the midst of the city to leave, and for [those] that are in the regions not to enter it, 22 for those days are days of vengeance, to make real all things that have been written. 23 Woe to the women with child and to those that suckle babies in those days! For [there] shall come a great need on the land and wrath upon this people, 24 and they shall fall by the sword and will be led away into all the nations, and Jerusalem will be trampled under foot [dual] by all the nations, until the times of the nations shall be completed.

	25 Ente, euvar tanwali mi Anar ar Işil ar eleni, ar cemende quárele mici liendi yar uar cene uşwe, castanen ramo i earo ar amortieryo, 26 íre atani nauvar hlaiwe caurenen, apacenila i nati tulila ambarenna. An menelo niri nauvar páline. 27 Ar tá cenuvalte i Atanyondo túla fanyasse arwa túreo ar túra alcaro. 28 Mal íre nati sine *yestar marta, tara halle ar á orta carelda, an etelehtielda túla hare. 

Furthermore, there will be signs in Sun and Moon and stars, and on earth anxiety of nations that do not see [any] escape, by reason of the noise of the sea and its uprising, when men shall be sick with fear, foreseeing the things coming upon [the] world. For the powers of heaven will be shaken. 27 And then they will see the Son of Man come in a cloud with power and great glory. 28 But when these things begin to happen, stand tall [pl.] and raise your head, for your deliverance is coming near.

	29 Ar quentes téna sestie: “Á tunta i *relyávalda ar ilye i hyane aldar: 30 Yando íre samilte tuimar, istalde inden cendiénen i sí i laire hare ná. 31 Sie yú istuvalde, íre cenuvalde nati sine martala, in Eruo aranie hare ná. 32 Násie quetin lenna: *Nónare sina ua autuva nó ilye nati martuvar. 33 Menel cemenye autuvat, mal ninye quettar uar oi autuva.
	34 Mal cima inde, pustien endalda návello lunga *accamatiénen ar *accasuciénen ar quárelénen coireo, ar rincinen enta aure tuluva lenna 35 ve remma. An tuluvas illinnar i marir palúresse i quanda cemeno. 36 Mal na coive, illume hyamila i poluvalde uşe ilye nati sine yar tuluvar, ar tare epe i Atanyondo.”
	37 I auressen enges i cordasse, peantala, mal lómisse etelendes ar marne i orontesse estaina Oron *Milloaldaron, 38 ar i quanda lie túle arinyave senna i cordasse hlarien se.

	29 And he spoke to them a comparison: “Notice the fig-tree and all the other trees: 30 Also [/even] when they have twigs, you know to yourselves by examining that now the summer is near. 31 Thus you will also know, when you shall see these things happen, that God's kingdom is near. 32 Truly I say to you: This generation will not pass before all things shall happen. 33 Heaven and earth shall pass [dual], but my words will not ever pass [away].
	34 But watch yourselves, to stop your heart from being heavy with over-eating and over-drinking and the anxiety of life, and suddenly [rincinen: with a sudden move] that day will come upon you 35 like a snare. For it shall come upon all that dwell on the surface of the entire earth. 36 But be awake, always praying that you shall be able to excape all these things that will come, and stand before the Son of Man.”
	37 In the days he was in the temple, teaching, but at night he went out and stayed at the mountain called Mount of Olives, 38 and the entire people came early to him in the temple to hear him.

RANTA 22
Sí i aşar *Alapulúne Massaron, ya ná estaina Lahtie, náne hare. 2 Ar i hére *airimor ar i parmangolmor cestaner manen poldelte nancaritas, pan runcelte i liello. 3 Mal Sátan lende mir Yúras, i quén estaina Iscariot, ye náne nótina imíca i yunque, 4 ar lendes oa ar quente as i hére *airimor ar i cordahestor pa manen se-antauvanes olla tien. 5 Tá anelte valime ar quenter i anelte merila anta sen telpe. 6 Ar şáquentes yan intyanelte ar cestane mára lú antáven se olla íre ua enge şanga aselte.

CHAPTER 22
Now the festival of Unleavened Breads, which is called Passover, was near. 2 And the chief priests and the scribes sought how they could destroy him, since they feared the people. 3 But Satan went into Judas, the one called Iscariot, who was counted among the twelve, 4 and he went away and spoke with the chief priests and the temple captains about how he was going to give him over to them. 5 Then they were happy and said that they were willing to give him money. 6 And he assemted to what they suggested and sought a good moment to give him over when [there] was not a crowd with them.

	7 Sí túle i aure *alapulúne massaron, yasse mauyane nahta i eule lahtiéva, 8 ar mentanes Péter ar Yoháno, quetila: “Mena ar áven manwa i lahtie, matielvan.” 9 Quentette senna: “Masse meril i caruvammes manwa?” 10 Quentes túna: “Yé, íre tuliste mir i osto, nér ye cóla cemina vene veluva let. Áse hilya mir i coa mir ya menuvas. 11 Ar atte quete yenna same i coa: “I *Peantar quete lyenna: Masse ea i nóme yassen polin mate i lahtie as hildonyar?” 12 Ar tana nér tanuva lent hoa  *sorostarwa oromar. Á manwa tasse!” 13 Ar oantette ar hirne i nati ve quentes túna, ar manwanette i lahtien.

	7 Now came the day of unleavened breads, on which it was necessary to kill the lamb of passover, 8 and he sent Peter and John, saying: “Go and prepare for us the passover, for us to eat.” 9 They [dual] said to him: “Where do you wish that we [dual] are to make it ready?” 10 He said to them [dual]: “Behold, when you [dual] go into the city, a man who is carrying an earthen vessel will meet you [dual]. Follow him into the house into which he shall go. 11 And you [dual] are to say to [him] who has the house: “The Teacher says to you: Where is the place where I can eat the passover with my disciples?” 12 And that man will show you [dual] a big furnished upper room. Prepare there!” 13 And they [dual] went away and fount the things as he said to them [dual], and they [dual] prepared for the passover.

	14 Ar íre i lúme túle, Yésus caine ara i sarno, ar i aposteli óse. 15 Ar quentes téna: “Ita emérien mate lahtie sina aselde nó perperin, 16 an quetin lenna: Uan matuva sa ata nó nauvas telyana Eruo araniesse.”
	17 Ar camila yulma antanes hantale ar quente: “Á mapa si ar ása menta quenello quenenna mici le. 18 An quetin lenna: Ho sí uan sucuva ata i yávello i liantasseo nó Eruo aranie tuluva.”
	19 Ente, nampes massa, antane hantale, rance sa ar quente: “Si ná hroanya, ya nauva antana rá len. Cara si enyalien ni.” 20 Ar i yulma mí imya lé apa mantelte i ahtumat, isse quetila: “Yulma sina ná i vinya vére hroanyanen, ya nauva et-ulyana rá len. 
	21 Mal yé, *vartonyo má ná asinye i sarnosse! 22 An i Atanyondo autea, ve náse martyana; ananta horro i quenen ter ye náse antana olla!” 23 Etta *yestanelte carpa mici inte pa man mici te náne ye carumne nat sina. 

	14 And when the time came, Jesus lay at the table, and the apostles with him. 15 And he said to them: “I have much desired to eat this passover with you before I suffer, 16 for I say to you: I will not eat it again before it shall be completed in God's kingdom.”
	17 And receiving a cup he gave thanks and said: “Take this and send it from person to person among you. 18 For I say to you: From now I shall not drink from the fruit of the vine before God's kingdom shall come.”
	19 Furthermore, he took a bread, gave thanks, broke it and said: “This is my body, that will be given on your behalf. Do this to recall me.” 20 And the cup in the same manner after they ate the evening meal, he saying: “This cup is the new covenant by means of my body, which will be poured out on your behalf.
	21 But behold, my betrayer's hand is with me on the table. 22 For the Son of Man is going away, as he is destined; and yet woe for the person through whom he is given over!” 23 Therefore they began to talk among themselves about who among them was [the one] that was going to do this thing.

	24 Mal enge yúcostie imbi te pa man mici te  nemne náve i antúra. 25 Ono quentes téna: “I liendion arani nar herultar, ar i samir túre or te nar estaine *maicarindor. 26 Mal elde áva na sie. Mauya yen ná i antúra mici le náve ve i amnessa, ar yen cane, náve ve núro. 27 An man i ambe túra ná, ye caita ara i sarno hya i núro? Ma uas ye caita ara i sarno? Ono mici le nanye ve i núro.
	28 Mal elde nar i elémier asinye tyastienyassen, 29 ar carin vére aselde, ve Atarinya acárie asinye vére, pa aranie, 30 matieldan ar sucieldan ara sarnonya aranienyasse, ar harieldan mahalmassen namien i nossi yunque Israélo.”
	31 Símon, Símon, yé! Sátan acánie silta le ve ore! 32 Mal inye ahyámie pa elye, i savielya ua nauva loica, ar íre mi lú enutúliel, á tala antoryame hánolyain.”

	24 But [there] was also a quarrel between them about who among them seemed to be the greatest. 25 But he said to them: “The kings of the nations are their lords, and [those] that have power over them are called benefactors. 26 But you do not be so. It is necessary for [the one] who is the greatest among you to be like the youngest, and for [him] who rules, to be like a servant. 27 For who is the greatest, [the one] who lies at the table or the servant? Is it not [the one] who lies at the table? But among you I am like the servant. 
	28 But you are [the ones] that have remained with me in my trials, 29 and I make a covenant with you, like my Father has made with me a covenant, about a kingdom, 30 for you to eat and for you to drink at my table in my kingdom, and for you to sit on thones to judge the twelve tribes of Israel.
	31 Simon, Simon, behold! Satan has demanded to sift you like grain! 32 But I have prayed concerning you, that your faith will not be insufficient, and when at [some] time you have returned, bring strength [antoryame, strengthening] to your brothers.”

33 Tá quentes senna: “Heru, nanye manwa menien aselye mir mando ar qualme véla!” 34 Mal eques: “Quetin lyenna, Péter: Tocot ua lamyuva síra nó equétiel nel i ual ista ni.”
	35 Ar quentes téna: “Íre le-mentanen pen *pocolle ar mattacolco ar hyapatu, lau pennelte erya nat?” Quentelte: “Lánelme.” 36 Tá quentes téna: “Mal sí mauya yen same *pocolle tala sa, mi imya lé yú mattacolca, ar mauya yen pene macil vace collarya ar ñete macil i telpen. 37 An quetin len i mauya i nat sina técina pa ni nauva carna nanwa: 'Ar anes nótina mici şanyelórali.' An ya ape ni nauva telyana.” 38 Tá quentelte: “Heru, ela, sís eat macil atta.” Quentes téna: “Tú faryat.”
	39 Apa etelendes mennes, ve haimerya né, i Orontenna *Milloaldaron, ar hildoryar se-hilyaner.

33 Then he said to him: “Lord, I am ready to go with you into prison and death alike!” 34 But he said: “I say to you, Peter: A cock will not sound today before you have said thrice that you do not know me.”
	35 And he said to them: “When I sent you [forth] without purse and food-box and shoes, surely you did not lack a single thing?” They said: “We did not.” 36 Then he said to them: “But now it is necessary for [the one] who has a purse to bring it, in the same manner a food-box, and it is necesssary for [the one] how lacks a sword to sell his cloak and get a sword for the money. 37 For I say to you that it is necessary that this thing written about me will be made true: 'And he was counted among lawless ones.' For [that] which concerns me will be completed.” 38 Then they said: “Lord, see, here are two swords.” He said to them: “They [dual] are enough.”
	39 After he went out he went, as his habit was, to the Mountain of Olives, and his disciples followed him.

40 Túlienwa i nómenna quentes téna: “Hyama, pustien inde tuliello úşahtienna!” 41 Ar sé lende oa telo, *os hatie sarneva, ar lantanes occaryanta ar hyamne, 42 quetila: “Atar, qui meril, á mapa yulma sina nillo! Ananta, nai indómelya martuva, lá ninya.” 43 Tá vala menello tannexe sen ar talle sen antoryame. 44 Mal tulila mir anquale hyamnes en ambe urdave, ar cendeleya náne linque yanen náne ve limbar serceva, lantala i talamenna. 45 Ar orontes hyamiello, lende i hildonnar ar hirne te lorne nyérenen, 46 ar quentes téna: “Mana castalda náven lorne? Á orta ar hyama, pustien inde tuliello úşahtienna!”
	47 Íre ena carampes, yé! şanga, ar i nér estaina Yúras, quén i yunqueo, lende opo te. Túles Yésunna miquien se.

40 Having come to the place he said to them: “Pray, to stop yourselves from coming into temptation!” 41 And he went away from them, about a stone's throw, and he fell to his knees [dual] and prayed, 42 saying: “Father, if you wish, take this cup from me! And yet, may your will happen, not mine.” 43 Then an angel from heaven showed himself to him and brought him strength. 44 But coming into an agony he prayed still more arduously, and his face was wet with what was like drops of blood, falling to the ground. 45 And he arose from prayer, went to the discuples and found them asleep with grief, 46 and he said to them: “What is your reason for being asleep? Rise and pray, to stop yourselves from coming into temptation!”
	47 While still he spoke, behold! a crowd, and the man called Judas, one of the twelve, went in front of  them. He came to Jesus to kiss him.
 
48 Mal Yésus quente senna: “Yúras, ma *vartal i Atanyondo miquenen?” 49 Íre i queni óse cenner ya martumne, quentelte: “Heru, ma petuvalme i macilden?” 50 Ar quén mici te pente i héra *airimo mól ar aucirne forya hlarya. 51 Mal hanquentasse Yésus quente: “Lava yú si marta!” Ar appanes i hlas ar nestane se. 52 Yésus tá quente i hére *airimonnar ar i cordahestannar ar amyárannar i náner túlienwe tar mapien se: “Ma etutúlielde arwa macillion ar rundalion, ve arponna? 53 Aure apa aure engen aselde i cordasse, ar ualde panyane máldat nisse. Mal si ná *lenya lúme, ar mornie ture.”

48 But Jesus said to him: “Judas, do you betray the Son of Man with a kiss?” 49 When the people with him saw what was going to happen, they said: “Lord, are we to strike with the sword?” [macil-nen > macilden] 50 And one among them struck the chief priest's slave and cut off his right ear. 51 But in answer Jesus said: “Let this as well happen.” And he touched the ear and healed him. 52 Jesus then said to the chief priests and to the temple captains and to the elders that were come there to seize him: “Have you come having swords and clubs, as upon a robber? 53 Day after day I was with you in the temple, and you did not put your hands on me. But this is your hour, and darkness rules.”

	54 Tá nampeltes ar tulyane se oa ar talle se mir i héra *airimo coa, mal Péter hilyane haiya. 55 Íre nartanelte náre endesse i paco ar hamner undu uo, Péter hamne mici te. 56 Mal enge *núre ye cenne se ara i ruine, ar apa tirie Péter quentes: “Yú nér sina náne aselte.” 57 Mal laquentes sa, quetila: “Uan ista se, nís!” 58 Apa şinta lúme hyana quén, cenila se, quente: “Yú elye er mici té ná!” Mal Péter quente: “Nér, uan!” 59 Ar apa *os lúme náne vanwa, hyana nér quente tancave: “É yú nér sina náne óse! Náse yú Alileallo!” 60 Mal Péter quente: “Nér, uan ista ya quétal!” Ar mi yana lú, íre en quétanes, tocot lamyane. 61 Ar i Heru querne inse ar yente Péterenna, ar Péter enyalde i Heruo quetie íre quentes senna: “Nó tocot lamya síra, ni-laquetuval nel.” 62 Ar lendes ettenna ar talante niessen.
	63 Sí i neri i sámer se mandosse lenganer senna yaiwenen, petila se. 64 Ar apa tompeltes maquentelte: “Queta ve Erutercáno! Man náne ye pente lye?” 65 Ar rimbe hyane naiquetiéli quentelte senna.

	54 Then they seized him andd led him away and brought him into the chief priests's house, but Peter followed nearby. 55 When they lit a fire in the middle of the courtyard and sat down together, Peter sat among them. 56 But [there] was a maidservant who saw him by the fire, and after watching Peter she said: “Also this man was with them.” 57 But he denied it, saying: “I do not know him, woman!” 58 After a short time another person, seeing him, said: “You as well [are] one among them!” But Peter said: “Man, I am not!” 59 And after about an hour was past, another man said firmly: “Indeed this man was with him! He is also from Galilee!” 60 But Peter said: “Man, I do not know what you are saying!” And in that moment, while he was still speaking, a cock sounded. 61 And the Lord turned [Q: turned himself] and looked at Peter, and Peter recalled the saying of the Kord when he said to him: “Before a cock sounds today, you will deny me thrice.” 62 And he went outside and broke down in tears.
	63 Now the men that had him in custody behaved towards with with scorn, striking him. 64 And after they covered him they asked: “Speak like a prophet! Who was [the one] that struck you?”  And numerous other blasphemies they spoke to him. 

	66 Íre i aure túle, i ocombe amyáraron i lieo, i hére *airimor ar i parmangolmor véla, ocomner. Ar tunceltes epe ocombelta, quetila: 67 “Qui elye ná i Hristo, ámen nyare!” Mal quentes téna: “Yando qui nyarnen len, laume savumneldes. 68 Ente, qui maquenten lenna, laume antumnelde nin hanquenta. 69 Mal ho sí i Atanyondo haruva ara Eruo forma túreva.” 70 Tá illi mici te quenter: “Ma elye, tá, ná Eruo yondo?” 71 Quentes téna: “Elde quetir i nanye.” 71 Quentelte: “Mana amba maure samilve astaroiva? An elve inwe ahlárier sa véra antoryallo!”

	66 When the day came, the council [or, congregation] of elders of the people, the chief priests and the scribes alike, assembled. And they drew him before their council, saying: 67 “If you are the Christ, tell us!” But he said to them: “Also [/even] if I told you, you were by no means going to believe it. 68 Furthermore, if I told you, you were by no means going to give me an answer. 69 But from now the Son of Man shall sit beside God's right hand of power.” 70 Then all among them said: “Are you, then, God's son?” 71 He said to them: “You say that I am.” 71 They said: “What more need do we have of witnesses? For we ourselves have heard it from his own mouth!”

RANTA 23
Ar apa quanda rimbelta oronte, tulyaneltes Pilátonna. 2 *Yestanelte quete pa intyaine ongweryar, quetila: “Nér sina ihírielme nuquéra nórelma ar váquéta i aiquen paitya *tungwi i Ingaranen, ar quetis pa inse i náse Hristo, aran.”

CHAPTER 23
And after their entire multitude arose, they led him to Pilate. 2 They began to speak about his supposed crimes, saying: “This man we have found subverting [lit. under-turning] our nation and forbidding that anyone pay taxes to the High King, and he says about himself that he is Christ, a king.”

3 Mal Piláto maquente senna: “Ma elye aran Yúraron ná?” Hanquentasse eques: “Elye quete sa.” 4 Mal Piláto quente i hére *airimonnar ar i şangannar: “Uan hire ongwe atan sinasse.” 5 Mal té ninder se, quetila: “Valtas i lie, peantala ter i quanda Yúrea, ar *yestiéla Aileasse utúlies yando sir!”
	6 Ono Piláto, íre hlasses ta, maquente qui i atan náne Alileallo. 7 Ar apa sintes i é anes  Herolo araniello, se-mentanes Herolenna, pan yú isse náne Yerúsalemesse yane auressen. 8 Mal Herol, íre cennes Yésus, sáme túra alasse, an nóvo andave mernes velitas, apa hlarie pa se, ar sámes i estel i cenumnes tanwa martea sénen. 9 Maquentes senna rimbe maquetier, ono sé hanquente sen munta.   

3 But Pilate asked him: “Are you king of [the] Jews?” In answer he said: “You say it.” 4 But Pilate said to the chief priests and to the crowds: “I do not find [any] crime on [the part of] this man.” 5 But they pressed him, saying: “He stirs up the people, teaching through the entire Judea, and after beginning in Galilee he has come also [/even] here!” [sir = hither] 
	6 But Pilate, when he heard that, asked if the man was from Galilee. 7 And after he knew [for sure] that he was indeed from Herod's kingdom, he sent him to Herod, since also he was in Jerusalem in those days. 8 But Herod, when he saw Jesus, had great joy, for beforehand he long wished to meet him, after hearing about him, and he had the hope that he was going to see a sign happen by him. 9 He asked him many questions, but he answered him nothing.
 
10 Mal i hére *airimor ar i parmangolmor oronter ar caramper pa ongweli yar quentelte carnes. 11 Tá Herol as cundoryar sanner  i anes munta, ar yaiwesse tompeltes calima larmanen ar *nanwentaner se Pilátonna. 12 Yana auresse Herol ar Piláto *yestaner nilme, quén as i exe, an nó si anette cottoli. 
	13 Piláto tá comyane i hére *airimor ar i lie 14 ar quente téna: “Tallelde nér sina ninna ve quén ye valta i lie, ar yé! cendanenyes epe le, mal uan hirne sesse cáma pa i ongwi yar quételde acáries. 15 É yando Herol láne, an ementayéses nan venna, ar yé! munta valda qualmeo anaie carna lo se. 16 Etta paimestuvanyes; tá lehtuvanyes.” [17] 18 Mal quanda liyúmelta yáme: “Á mapa oa nér sina, mal ámen lehta Varavas!” 19 Sé náne nér hátina mir mando castanen amortiéno ya náne martienwa i ostosse, ar nahtiéno.

10 But the chief priests and the scribes arose and talked about crimes that they said he did. 11 Then Herod and his guards thought that he was nothing, and in mockery they covered him with a bright garment and sent him back to Pilate. 12 On that day Herod and Pilate started a friendship, one with the other, for before this they were enemies.
	13 Pilate then assembled the chief priests and the people 14 and said to them: “You brought this man to me as one who stirs up the people, and behold! I examined him before you, but I did not find in him [any] guilt concerning the things that you say he has done. 15 Indeed also Herod did not [= Indeed neither did Herod], for he has sent him back to us, and behold! nothing worthy of death has been done by him. 16 Therefore I will chastise him; then I will release him. [17] 18 But their entire host cried: “Take away this man, but release to us Barabbas!” 19 He was a man thrown into prison by reason of an uprising that had happened in the city, and of murder. 

20 Ata Piláto yalde te, pan mernes lehta Yésus. 21 Tá yámelte, quetila: “Áse tarwesta, áse tarwesta!” 22 Mí neldea lú quentes téna: “Tá mana ulco nér sina acárie? Munta valda qualmen hirnen sesse. Apa antie sen paimesta etta lehtuvanyes.” 23 Mal nindeltes hoe rambínen, canila tarwestierya, ar rambeltar turuner. 24 Ar Piláto namne i ñetumnelte ya mernelte. 25 Lehtanes tien i nér hátina mir mando amortiénen ar nahtiénen, ye arcanelte, mal Yésus antanes olla nirmeltan.
	26 Ar íre mentaneltes oa, nampelte quén estaina Símon Cirénello ye túle i restallon, ar mauyanelte sen cole tarwerya. 27 Mal hilyane se hoa liyúme i liello, ar nisseli i pentexer nyérenen ar náner yaimie sen. 

20 Again Pilate called them, since he wanted to release Jesus. 21 Then they cried, saying: “Crucify him, crucify him!” 22 For the third time he said to them: “Than what evil has this man done? Nothing worthy of death I found in him. After giving him chastisement I will therefore release him.” 23 But they pressed him with loud [lit. great] shouts, demanding his crucifixion, and their shouts prevailed. 24 And Pilate judged that they were going to get what they wanted. 25 He released to them the man thrown into prison because of [-nen] an uprising and because of murder, whom they asked for, but Jesus he gave over to their will.
	26 And when they led him away, they seized a person called Simon from Cyrene who came from the fields, and they compelled him to carry his cross. 27 But [there] followed him a great multitude from the people, and some women that struck themselves with [-nen] grief and were wailing for him.

28 Yésus querne inse téna ar quente: “Yerúsalémo selyer, áva na yaimie inyen! Na yaimie elden ar hínaldain, an yé! auri túlar yassen queni quetuvar: 'Valime nar i nissi ú yáveo, ar i súmar yar uar nostane ar i tyetsi yar uar *tyente!' 30 Tá *yestuvalte quete i orontinnar: 'Á lanta menna!', ar i ambonnar: 'Áme tope!' 31 An qui carilte nati sine íre i alda ná níte, mana martuva íre ehesties?”
	32 Mal hyana nér atta, ulcarindor, nánet yú tulyaine tar náven nance óse. 33 Ar íre túlelte i nómenna estaina *Caraxo, tarwestanelte sé ar i ulcarindor, er foryaryasse ar er hyaryaryasse. 34 Mal Yésus quente: “Atar, áten apsene, an ualte ista mana cáralte.” Ente, satien larmaryar hantelte *şanwali. 35 Ar i queni tirner. Mal i turi caramper yaiwenen, quetila: “Hyanali erehties; lava sen rehta inse, qui nér sina ná Eruo Hristo, i cílina.” 

28 Jesus turned [Q: turned himself] towards them and said: “Daughters of Jerusalem, do not be wailing for me! Be wailing for yourselves and for your children, for behold! days are coming in which people will say: 'Happy are the women without fruit, and the wombs that did not conceive and he nipples that did not suckle!' 30 Then they will begin to say to the mountains: 'Fall upon us!', and to the hills: 'Cover us!' 31 For if they do thest things when the tree is moist, what will happen when it has withered?”
	32 But two other men, evildoers, were also led thither to be slain with him. 33 And when they came to the place called Skull, they crucified him and the evildoers, one on his right and one on his left, 34 But Jesus said: “Father, forgive them, for they do not know what they are doing.” Furthermore, to distribute his garments they threw lots. 35 And the people watched. But the rulers talked with mockery, saying: “Others he has saved; let him save himself, if this man is God's Christ, the chosen one.”

36 Yando i ohtari lenganer senna yaiwenen. Túlelte har ar antaner se sára limpenen 37 ar quenter: “Qui nalye Yúraron aran, á rehta imle!” 38 Yú enge tecie or se: “Si ná aran Yúraron.”
	39 Mal er i lingala úcarindoron naiquente senna: “Ma elye ua i Hristo? Á rehta imle ar met!” 40 Hanquentasse i exe naityane se ar quente: “Ma ual ruce Erullo, sí íre nalye i imya námiesse? 41 Ar engwe failave sie, an cámangwe yan nangwe valde i natinen yar carnengwe, mal nér sina acárie munta ulca.” 42 Ar quentes senna: “Yésus, áni enyale íre tulil aranielyasse!” 43 Ar quentes senna: “Násie quetin lyenna: Síra euval asinye mi Paralis.”

36 Also the soldiers behaved towards him with scorn. They came near and presented him with sour wine 37 and said: “If you are king of [the] Jews, save yourself!” 38 Also [there] was a writing above him: “This is the king of [the] Jews.”
	39 But one of the hanging evildoers blasphemed him: ”Are you not the Christ? Save yourself and us!” 40 In answer the other rebuked him and said: ”Do you not fear God, now that you are under the same judgement? 41 And we [dual] justly so, for we are receiving that to which we are worthy by the things that we have done, but this man has done nothing evil.” 42 And he said to him: “Jesus, recall me when you come in your kingdom!” 43 And he said to him: “Truly I say to you: Today you will be with be in Paradise.”

	44 Sí i lúme náne *os i enquea, ar mornie lantane i quanda cemenna tenna i nertea lúme, 45 pan i áre loitane; tá i fanwa i cordasse náne narcana undu i ende. 46 Ar yamila taura ómanen, Yésus quente: “Atar, mir mátyat antan olla fairenya!” Quétiéla ta effirnes.
	47 Íre i *tuxantur cenne ya martane, antanes alcar Erun ar quente: “Nanwave nér sina náne faila!” 48 Ar ilye i şangar yar náner ocómienye cenie sinan, íre cennelte yar martaner, lender oa pétala ambostelta, 49 Mal i sinter Yésus tarner haiya, yú i nissi i túler óse Alileallo, íre cennelte nati sine. 50 Ar túle nér yeo esse náne Yósef, quén i Combeo, mane ar faila nér. 51 Sé ua şáquente panoltanna hya cardaltanna. Túles Arimaşeallo, osto i Yúraron, ye yente ompa Eruo aranienna. 52 Apa menie minna Pilátonna arcanes Yésuo hroa. 

	44 Now the hour was around the eighth, and darkness fell upon the entire earth until the ninth hour, 45 since the sunlight failed. Then the curtain in the temple was torn down the middle. 46 And crying with a mighty voice, Jesus said: “Father, into your hands I give over my spirit!” Having said that he expired.
	47 When the centurion saw what happened, he gave glory to God and said: “Truly this man was just!” 48 And all the crowds that were gathered for this sight, when they saw [the things] that happened, went away beating their chest. 49 But [those] that knew Jesus stood far away, also the women that came with him from Galilee, watching these things. 50 And [there] came a man whose name was Joseph, a person of the Council, a good and just man. 51 He did not assent to their plan or their deed. He came from Arimathea, a city of the Jews, and looked forward to God's kingdom. 52 After going inside to Pilate he asked for Jesus' body.

53 Ar nampeses undu ar vaitane sa *páşenen, ar se-panyanes hrótanoirisse i ondosse, yasse *úquen náne caitienwa nóvo. 54 Si náne i aure Manwiéva, ar i *sendareo yesta náne hare. 55 Mal i nissi i túler óse et Alileallo hilyaner ar cenner i noire ar i nóme yasse hroarya náne panyana. 56 Tá nanwennelte manwien *tyávelasseli ar níşime milloli. Mal sendelte i *sendaresse, i axannen. 

53 And he took it down and wrapped it with linen, and he put him in a carved-out tomb in the rock, in which no one had lain before. 54 This was the day of Preparation, and the beginning of the sabbath was near. 55 But the women that came with him from Galilee followed and saw the tomb and the place where his body was placed. 56 Then they went back to prepare spices and fragrant oils. But they rested on the sabbath, according to [or 'by', -nen] the commandment.

RANTA 24 
I minya auresse i otsolasse lendelte ita arinyave i noirinna, colila i *tyávelassi manwane lo te. 2 Mal hirnelte i ondo *peltana oa i noirillo, ar íre mittanelte, ualte hire i Heru Yésus Hristo hroa. 4 Íre anelte elmendasse pa si, yé! nér atta arwe alcarinque larmar tarnet ara te. 5 Íre i nissi náner ruhtaine ar querner cendelelta i talamenna, i neri quenter téna: “Manen ná i cestalde i Coirea mici qualinar? 6 Uas sisse, mal anaies ortaina! Enyala manen carampes lenna íre en anes Alileasse, 7 quetila i mauya i Atanyondon náve antana olla mannar atanion úcareva ar náve tarwestana ar orta i neldea auresse.”

CHAPTER 24
On the first day of [lit. in] the week they went very early to the tomb, bearing the spices prepared by them. 2 But they found the stone rolled away from the grave, and when they entered, they did not find the body of the Lord Jesus Christ. 4 While they were in wonder about this, behold! two men with radiant garments stood beside them. 5 When the women were terrified and turned their face towards the ground, the men said to them: “How is [it] that you seek the Living One among [the] dead? 6 He is not here, but he has been raised! Recall how he spoke to you when he was still in Galilee, 7 saying that it is necessary for the Son of Man to be given over into the hands of men of sin and to be cruficied and to rise on the third day.”

8 Ar enyaldelte quetieryar, 9 ar nanwennelte i noirillo ar nyarner ilye nati sine i minquen ar ilye i exin. 10 Anelte María Mahtaléne, ar Yoanna, ar María amil Yácovo. Yú i hyane nissi aselte nyarner i apostelin nati sine. 11 Mal quetier sine şéner tien ve *aucie, ar ualte sáve ya i nissi quenter.
	12 Mal Péter oronte ar norne i noirinna, ar cúnala ompa cennes i vaimar erinque. Tá lendes oa, elmendasse pa mana náne martienwa.
	13 Mal yé! i imya auresse atta mici te nánet tiettasse mastonna estaina Emmaus, lár atta ar canasta Yerúsalemello, 14 ar quétanette quén as i exe pa ilye nati sine yar náner martienwe.

8 And they recalled his sayings, 9 and they returned from the tomb and told all these things to the eleven and to all the others. 10 They were Mary Magdalene, and Joanna, and Mary mother of Jacob. Also the other women with them told the apostles these things. 11 But these sayings seemed to them like folly, and they did not believe what the women said.
	12 But Peter arose and went to the tomb, and bending forward he saw the wrappings alone. Then he went away, in wonder about what had happened.
	13 But behold! on the same day two among them were on their way to a city called Emmaus, two and a quarter leagues [= 11 kilometers] from Jerusalem, 14 and they [dual] were talking one with the other about all these things that had happened.

	15 Sí íre quétanette ar quaptanette quettar, yú Yésus immo túle har ar vantane asette, 16 mal henduttat nánet hépine istiello se. 17 Quentes túna: “Mana quettar sine yar quapteaste íre vanteaste?” Ar tarnette arwe nyére mi cendeletta. 18 Hanquentasse i quén estaina Cleopas quente senna: “Ma nalye i erya quén marila Yerúsalemesse ye ua ista i nati yar amartier sasse mi auri sine?” 19 Ar quentes túna: “Mana?” Quentette senna: “I nattor yar ape Yésus Násaretello, ye náne Erutercáno taura mi carda ar quetta epe Eru ar i quanda lie 20 – ar manen hére *airimonyar antaner se olla námien qualmeva ar tarwestaner se. 21 Mal sámelme i estel i nér sina náne ye etelehtumne Israel. Ono ara ilye nati sine, síra ná i neldea aure apa si martane.

	15 Now when they were talking and exchanged words, also Jesus himself came near and walked with them, 16 but their eyes [dual] were kept from knowing him. 17 He said to them: ”What are these words that you are exchanging while you are walking?” And they stood [still], with grief in their face. 18 In answer the man called Cleophas said to him: “Are you the only person dwelling in Jerusalem who does not know the things that have happened in it in these days?” 19 And he said: “What?” They said to him: “The things that concern Jesus from Nazareth, who was a prophet mighty in deed and word before God and the entire people 20 – and how our chief priests gave him over to a judgement of death and crucified him. 21 But we had the hope that this man was [the one] that was going to deliver Israel. But besides all these things, now is the third day after this happened.”

22 Ente, nisseli mici me acaptier me, an meniéla arinyave i noirinna 23 pen hirie hroarya túlelte quetila i cennelte maur valíva, i quenter i náse coirea. 24 Ente, ennoli mici me lender oa i noirinna, ar hirnelte i enge sie, aqua ve i nissi quenter, mal ualte cene sé.”
	25 Tá quentes túna: “A úhandar, lence endeo savien ilye i nati yar i Erutercánor quenter! 26 Ma ua mauyane i Hriston perpere nati sine ar mene mir alcarerya?” 27 Ar *yestala ho Móses, ar ilye i Erutercánor, tyarnes tu hanya i nati yar apir inse ilye i Tehtelessen. 
	
22 Furthermore, some women among us have startled us, for after going early to the tomb 23 without finding his body they came saying that they saw a vision of some angels, that said that he is alive. 24 Also, some among us went away to the tomb, and they found that [it] was so, just as the women said, but they did not see him.”
	25 Then he said to them: “O senseless ones, slow of heart to believe all the things that the Prophets said! 26 Was it not necessary for the Christ to suffer these things and go into his glory?” 27 And beginning from Moses, and all the Prophets, he caused them to understand the things that concern himself in the Scriptures. 

	28 Ar túlette i mastonna ya náne lendatto met, ar sé carne ve qui lelyumnes ompa talo. 29 Mal mauyanette sen, quetila: “Á lemya asemme, an i şinye hare ná, ar i aure rato nauva vanwa.” 30 Ar íre caines asette ara i sarno nampes i massa, aistane sa, rance sa ar antane sa tun. 31 Ar mi yana lú henduttat nánet aqua pantaine, ar sintettes, mal vánes tullo. 32 Ar quentette, quén i exenna: ”Ma endangwa ua urunye íre quétanes asengwe i mallesse, íre pantanes i Tehteler vent?” 33 Ar mi yana imya lúme orontette ar nanwennette Yerúsalemenna, ar hirnette i yunque ar i náner ocómienwe aselte, 34 i quenter: “I Heru é anaie ortana ar atánie inse Símonden!” 35 Ar tú nyarnet pa yar náner martienwe i mallesse ar manen anes carna sinwa tun raciénen i massa.

 	28 And they came to the city that was the [met =] goal of their journey, and he did as if he was going to go forward from there. 29 But they compelled him, saying: “Remain with us [dual], for the evening is near, and the day will soon be gone.” 30 And when he lay with them at the table he took the bread, blessed it, broke it and gave it to them. 31 And in that moment their eyes were fully opened, and they knew him, but he disappeared from them. 32 And they said, one to the other: “Did our heart not burn when he was speaking with us on the road, when he opened the Scriptures to us?“ 33 And in that same hour they arose and returned to Jerusalem, and they found the eleven and [those] that were gathered with them, 34 who said: “The Lord has indeed been raised and has shown himself to Simon!” 35 And they told about [the things] that had happened on the road and how he was made known to them by breaking the bread.
 
36 Íre en quentelte pa nati sine, Yésus immo tarne endeltasse ar quente téna: “Nai samuvalde raine!” 37 Mal pan anelte ruhtaine ar sámer caure, sannelte i cennelte faire. 38 Etta quentes téna: “Mana castalda rucieldan, ar manen ná i ortear sanweli úsaviéva endaldasse? 39 Cena mányat ar talunyat, i inye ná; áni appa ar cena, an faire ua same hráve yo axor ve cénalde i inye same.” 40 Ar quetila si tannes tien máryat ar talyat. 41 Mal íre en ualte sáve, i alassenen ar i elmendanen, quentes téna: “Ma sámalde sisse nat matien?” 42 Ar antanelte sen ranta *tórina lingwiva, 43 ar nampeses ar mante sa epe hendultat.
	44 Ar quentes téna: ”Nati sine nar quettanyar yar quenten lenna íre en anen aselde, i ilye i nati técine Móseo Şanyesse ar mí Erutercánor ar mi Airelíri nauvar carne nanwe.”

36 When they still spoke about these things, Jesus himself stood in their midst and said to them: “May you have peace!” 37 But since they were terrified and had fear, they thought that they saw a spirit. 38 Therefore he said to them: “What is your reason for your fear, and how is [it] that thoughts of unbelief are arising in your heart? 39 See my hands and my feet, that it is I; touch me and see, for a spirit does not have flesh and bones as you are seeing that I have.” 40 And saying this he showed them his hands and his feet. 41 But when they still did not believe, for the joy and for the wonder, he said to them: “Are you having here [some]thing to eat?” 42 And they gave him a piece of broiled fish, 43 and he took it and ate it before their eyes.

45 Tá pantanes sámalta, lavila tien hanya i Tehteler, 46 ar quentes téna: “Sie ná técina, in i Hristo perperuva, ar in ortuvas i neldea auresse, 47 ar in esseryanen mo caruva sinwa inwis úcariva ilye i liendessen. *Yestala Yerúsalemello 48 elde nauvar *vettoli pa nati sine. 49 Ar yé! inye menta lenna ta pa ya Atarinya antane vanda. Mal elde hara i ostosse tenna nauvalde tópine túrenen et tarmenello.”
	50 Epeta tulyanes te tenna Vetánia, ar ortanes máryat ar aistane te. 51 Ar íre aistanes te, anes mapana oa tello ar cólina ama mir menel. 52 Ar lantanelte undu sen ar nanwenner Yérusalemenna arwe túra alasseo. 53 Ar anelte illume i cordasse, aistala Eru.
	
	45 Then he opened their mind, allowing them to understand the scriptures, 46 and he said to them: “So [it] is written, that the Christ is to suffer, and that he is to rise on the third day, 47 and that by his name one is to make known repentance of sins in all the nations. Beginning from Jerusalem 48 you will be witnesses of these things. 49 And behold! I send you that of which my father gave promise. But you stay in the city until you shall be covered with power from on high.”
	50 Thereafter he led them as far as Bethany, and he raised his hands and blessed them. 51 And while he blessed them, he was taken away from them and carried up into heaven. 52 And they fell down to him and returned to Jerusalem having great joy. 53 And they were always in the temple, blessing God.