Paulo tecetta i Filippiannar

Paul's letter to the Philippians

RANTA 1
Paulo ar Timoşeo, Yésus Hristo móli, ilye i airin Yésus Hristosse i ear Filippisse, ar ortirindoin ar ocombenúroin: 2 Nai samuvalde lisse ar raine ho Eru Atarelva ar i Heru Yésus Hristo.
	3 Antan hantale Ainonyan quiquie enyalin le. 4 Illume, mi ilya arcandenya illin mici le, carin arcande mi alasse 5 i rantanen ya samilde mi carie i evandinyon sinwa, i minya aurello tenna lú sina. 6 An nanye tanca pa nat sina, i sé ye *yestane mára molie lesse yando telyuva sa, tenna Yésus Hristo aure. 7 Carin mai saniénen sie pa le illi, pan samin le endanyasse, elde i illi samir ranta mí lisse asinye – naxanyainen, ar véla i variénen ar tulciénen i evandilyonwa.

CHAPTER 1
Paul and Timothy, thralls of Jesus Christ, to all the holy ones in Jesus Chrsit that are in Philippi, and to overseers and congregation servants: 2 May you have grace and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
	3 I give thanks to my God whenever I recall you. 4 Always, in every petition of mine for all among you, I make petition in joy 5 because of [-nen] the part that you have in making the gospel known, from the first day until this moment. 6 For I am certain about this thing, that he who began a good work in you will also complete it, until the day of Jesus Christ. 7 I do well by thinking so about you all, since I have you in my heart, you that all have a part with me in the grace – by my fetters, and alike by the defending and establishing of the gospel.

	8 An Eru astarmonya ná i milyan le illi, Yésus Hristo endanen. 9 Ar nat sinan hyáman: i melmelda en nauva ambe ar ambe úvea, istyanen ar laicenen, 10 lávala len tyasta i valdie nati, náveldan ú vaxeo ar lá tyárala exi lanta, tenna i Hristo aure. 11 Nauvalde quátine faila yávenen, ya ea Yésus Hristonen, i alcaren ar laitalen Eruva.
	12 Sí merin i istalde, hánor, i sómanya atyárie i evandilyon lelya ompa ambe lá pusta sa, 13 ar sie naxanyar anaier cárine sinwe mi Hristo i quanda artan ar ilye i exin. 14 Ente, i amarimbar i hánoron i Herusse, i acámier huore naxanyainen, ambe yondave veryar quete i quetta ú caureo.

	8 For God is my witness that I long for you all, with the heart of Jesus Christ. 9 And for this thing I am praying: that your love will still be more and more abundant, by knowledge and by keenness of perception, 10 allowing you to test the important things, for you to be without stain and not causing others to fall, until the day of the Christ. 11 You will be filled with just fruit, which is by Jesus Christ, to the glory and the praise of God.
	12 Now I wish that you are to know, brothers, that my condition has caused the gospel to go forward more than stopping it, 13 and so my fetters have been made known in Christ to the entire fortress and to all the others. 14 Furthermore, the greater number [lit. the most numerous] of the brothers in the Lord, that have received courage by my chains, more extensively dare to speak the word without fear.

	15 É ear queneli i carir Hristo sinwa et *hrúcenello ar costiello, mal exeli yando holmo. 16 Té carir i Hristo sinwa et melmello, an istalte i anaien panyaina sisse varien i evandilyon. 17 Mal i exi carir sa pan merilte i cos, lá poice castainen, an intyalte i tyaruvalte şangie nin naxanyassen. 18 Tá mana? –  hequa i mi ilya lé, as nurtaine sanwali hya mi nanwie, i Hristo ná carna sinwa, ar etta nanye valima. É nauvan valima ata, 19 an istan i sie ñetuvan rehtie, arcandeldanen ar camiénen i faire Yésus Hristo, 20 ve maivoinenya ar estelinya i nauvan nucumna muntasse, mal ilya veriesse i Hristo nauva laitana hroanyanen – tambe illume yá, síve yando sí, coiviesse hya qualmesse.
	21 An inyen coivie ná Hristo, ar qualie, came amba. 22 Mal qui lemie coiviesse tea i polin care molie ya cole yáve, uan ista mana ciluvan. 23 Nanye túcina imbe i atta: Merin auta silo ar náve as Hristo, an ta nauva ita arya. 

	15 Indeed there are some that make Christ known out of envy and quarrelling, but others also sincerely. 16 They make the Christ known out of love, for they know that I have been put here to protect the gospel. 17 But the others do it since they want the strife, not for pure reasons, for they suppose that they will cause tribulation against me in my fetters. 18 Then what? – except that in every manner, with hidden thoughts or in truth, the Christ is made known, and therefore I am happy. Indeed I shall be happy again, 19 for I know that so I shall get salvation, by your supplication and by receiving the spirit of Jesus Christ, 20 according to my great longing and my hope that I shall be humbled in nothing, but in all boldness the Christ shall be praised by means of my body – as always before, so also now, in life or in death.
	21 For to me life is Christ, and dying, to receive more. 22 But if remaining in life means that I can do work that bears fruit, I do not know what I am to choose. 23 I am drawn between the two: I wish to go away from here and be with Christ, for that is much better.

24 Ono ea ambe túra maure i lemyuvan i hrávesse, márieldan. 25 Ar nála tanca pa si, istan i lemyuvan ar termaruvan as le illi, menieldan ompa ar i samieldan i alasse ya i savie anta. 26 Sie ecuva len laita inde Hristo Yésusse mi úvea lé – pa ní, návenyanen aselde ata. 
	27 Eryave á lenga mi lé valda i evandilyono pa i Hristo! Sie, lá címala qui tulin velien le hya qui nanye oa, ecuva nin hlare pa sómalda, i tarilde tance mi faire er, mahtala quén ara quén i savien i evandilyono, 28 muntasse ruhtaine lo i tarir lenna. Ta ná tien tanwa nancariéno, mal len, rehtiéno. Yando tanwa sina tule Erullo. 29 An lenna náne antaina, rá Hriston, lá eryave save sesse, mal yando perpere rá sen. 30 An samilde i imya ohta ya cennelde i inye sáme, ar ve sí hláralde i en samin.

24 But [there] is a greater need that I shall remain in the flesh, for your good. 25 For being certain about this, I know that I shall remain and keep dwelling with all of you, for you to go forwards and for you to have the joy which the faith gives. 26 Thus it will be possible for you to praise yourselves in Jesus Christ in an abundant manner – concerning me, by my being with you again.
	27 Solely behave in a manner worthy of the gospel about the Christ! Thus, not heeding if [= no matter whether] I come to see you or if I am away, it will be possible for me to hear about your condition,, that you stand firm in one spirit, fighting person by person [= shoulder by shoulder] for the faith of the gospel, 28 in nothing terrified by [those] that stand against you. That is to them a sign of undoing, but to you, of salvation. Also this sign comes from God. 29 For to you was given, on behalf of Christ, not solely to believe in him, but also to suffer on behalf of him. 30 For you have the same war that you saw that I had, and as you now are hearing that I still have.

RANTA 2
Etta, qui ea hortie Hristosse, qui ea tiutale melmeo, qui ea etsatie faireva, qui ear oravie ar *ofelme, 2 cara alassenya quanta návenen er sámo, arwe i imya melmeo, nála er mi fea, arwe i imye sanwi, 3 cárala munta meriénen cos hya cumna alcar, mal nalda sámanen nótala quén i exe ambe túra lá elde, 4 címala lá vére nattoldar erinque, mal yando i exion nattor.
	5 Sama i imya sáma ya yando enge mi Hristo Yésus! 6 Sé, nála Eruo cantasse, ua nonte náve ve Eru nat ya mapumnes. 7 Úsie, carnes inse lusta ar nampe mólo canta ar náne carna ve atani. 8 Ar íre hirnes inse atano cantasse, nucumnes inse ar náne *canwacimya tenna qualme, é qualme i tarwesse.

CHAPTER 2
Therefore, if [there] is encouragement in Christ, if [there] is comfort of love, if [there] is a sharing [etsatie: distributing] of spirit, if [there] are mercy and compassion, 3 make my joy full by being of one mind, having the same love, being one in soul, having the same thoughts, 3 doing nothing because of wishing strife or empty glory, but with a lowly mind counting one another greater than yourselves, 4 heeding not your own matters alone, but also the matters of the others.
	5 Have the same mind that also existed in Christ Jesus! 6 He, being in God's form, did not count being like God a thing that he was going to seize. 7 On the contrary, he made himself empty and took a thrall's form and was made like a man. 8 And when he found himself in a man's form, he humbled himself and was obedient until death, indeed death on the cross.

9 Etta Eru yando carne se arata ar antane sen i esse or ilye essi, 10 tyarien cúna ilya occa, ion ear menelde ar ion ear cemende ar ion ear nu talan, 11 ar tyarien ilya lamba quete pantave i Yésus Hristo ná Heru, Eru i Ataro alcaren.
	12 Sie, meldanyar, tambe illume anaielde *canwacimye, lá eryave íre engen tasse mal sí ita ambe íre nanye oa, síve mola rehtieldan mi caure ar palie, 13 an Eru ná ye mole lesse ve sanas mai, tyárala le mere ar mole véla. 14 Cara ilqua ú nurrion ar costiéron, 15 náveldan ú mordo ar poice, Eruo híni imíca i quarce ar rícine queni lúmeldo. Mici té caltalde ve calacolindor i mardesse, 16 hépala i quetta coiviéva. Etta laituvanyexe Hristo auresse, i uan onórie muntan hya omótien muntan.

9 Therefore God also made him supreme and gave him the name over all names, 10 to cause to bend every knee, of [those] who are in heaven and of [those] that are on earth and of [those] who are under the ground, 11 and to cause every tongue to say openly that Jesus Christ is Lord, for the glory of God the Father. 
	12 Thus, my beloved, as you have always been obedient, not solely when I was there but now much more when I am away, thus work for your salvation in fear and shivering, 13 for God is [the one] who works in you as he thinks well, causing you to wish and to work alike. 14 Do everything without complaints and quarrelings, 15 for you to be without stain and clean, God's children among the perverse and twisted people of your time. Among them you shine as light-bearers in the world, 16 keeping the word of life. Therefore I will praise myself on the day of Christ, that I have not run for nothing or I have toiled for nothing. 

17 Mal yando qui nanye etulyaina i *yancanna ar savieldo núromolienna, nanye valima ar samin alasse as illi mici le. 18 Mí imya lé, na valime ar sama alasse óni, yando elde!
	19 An samin i estel i Heru Yésunen i rato mentuvan Timoşeo lenna; sie yando inye samuva i alasse istiéva i nati yar apir le. 20 An uan same exe arwa i imya óreo, quén ye holmo tiruva nattoldar. 21 An ilye i exi cestar vére nattoltar, lá tai Yésus Hristova. 22 Mal istalde manen tannes voronwerya – i ve hína as atar móles óni i evandilyonen. 23 Etta samin i estel i nér sina mentuvan, ve rato ve ecénien manen nattonyar tarir. 24 É nanye tanca i Herusse i yando inye rato tuluva.  

17 But also [/even] if I am poured out upon the sacrifice and upon the ministry of your faith, I am happy and I have joy with all among you. 18 In the same manner, be happy and have joy with me, you as well! 
	19 For I have the hope by the Lord Jesus that soon I will send Timothy to you; thus I as well will have the joy of knowing the things that concern you. 20 For I do not have another with the same inclination [óre], one who sincerely will watch your matters. 21 For all the others seek their own matters, not those of Jesus Christ. 22 But you know how he showed his steadfastness – that like a child with [his] father he laboured with me for the gospel. 33 Therefore I have the hope that I will send this man, as soon as I have seen how my matters stand. 24 Indeed I am certain in the Lord that  I as well will come soon.

	25 Mal savin i ea maure i mentan lenna Epafrolíto, hánonya ye mole ar mahta asinye, mal *lenya mentaina nér ar núro maurenyan. 26 An milyas vele le illi, ar asámies nyére pan hlasselde i anes hlaiwa. 27 An é anes hlaiwa, hare qualmenna, mal Eru oráve sesse, é lá sesse erinqua, mal yando inyesse, lá mérala i samumnen nyére nyéresse. 28 Etta mentanyes ta ambe rato, velieldan se ar samieldan alasse, ar sie inye samuva mis nyére. 29 Etta áse came i Herusse, mi ilya alasse, ar lava taiti nerin náve mirwe len, 30 an castanen i Heruo moliéno túles hare qualmenna, panyala cuilerya raxesse carien i núromolie ya elde náner hampe antiello nin.

	25 But I believe there is a need that I send you Epaphroditus, my brother who works and figths with me, but your sent-forth man and a servant for my need. 26 For he longs to see you all, and he has had grief since you heard that he was sick. 27 For indeed he was sick, near to death, but God had mercy on him, indeed not on him alone, but also on me, not wishing that I was to have grief on grief. 28 Therefore I send him that more soon, for you to meet him and for you to have joy, and thus I will have less grief. 29 Therefore receive him in the Lord, in all joy, and let such men be precious to you, 30 for by reason of the work of the Lord he came near to death, putting his life in danger to do the ministry [núromolie, servant-work] which you were prevented from giving me. 

RANTA 3
Teldave, hánonyar: Sama alasse mí Heru! Tece len i imye nati ua urda nin, mal len nás varnasse.
	2 Tira inde pa i huor, tira inde pa i molir ulco, tira inde pa i cirir i hráve! 3 An elve i nanwa *oscirie nar, i Eruo Fairenen nar núror ar laitar inwe Yésus Hristonen, lá sávala i samilve varnasselva i hrávenen, 4 ómu inye é same castali savien i samin varnasse yando i hrávenen.

CHAPTER 3
Finally, my brothers: Have joy in the Lord! To write the same things to you is not difficult for me, but to you it is a safety. 
	3 Watch [out for] yourselves for the dogs, watch yourselves for those that work evil, watch yourselves for [those] who cut the flesh. 3 For we are the true circumcision, [we] that by God's spirit are servants, and praise ourselves by Jesus Christ, not believing we have our security by the flesh, 4 though I indeed have reasons for believing that I have security also by the flesh.

	Qui aiquen save i samis varnasse mí hráve, inye same amba: 5 *Oscirna i toltea auresse, nóna mir Israel, Venyamíno nosseo, Heverya Heveryalion, pa i Şanye: Farisa, 6 pa uryala savie: roitala i ocombe, pa i failie ya ná Şanyenen: quén ye ilvana né. 7 Mal i nati yar náner nin ñetie, tai onótien ve *uñetie, castanen i Hristo. 8 Ono é notin ilye nati ve *úñetie, i arata mirwiénen i istyo pa Yésus Hristo Herunya. Castaryanen yando alávien ilye natin náve vanwe nin, ar sanan pa tai ve *auhantar, ñetienyan Hristo 9 ar náven hírina sesse, lá véra failienyanen, ta ya tule i Şanyenen, mal yanen ea saviénen Hristosse, i failie ya tule Erullo i saviénen, 10 istienyan sé ar enortieryo melehte ar same ranta perperieryaron, nála cátina qualmeryanen, 11 – cenien qui ea lé yanen ece nin rahta i enortienna qualinillon. 

If anyone believes that he has security in the flesh, I have more: 5 Circumcized on the eighth day, born into Israel, of the tribe of Benjamin, a Hebrew of Hebrews, concerning the Law: a Pharisee, 6 concerning burning faith: persecuting the congregation, concerning the righteousness that is by Law: a person who was perfect. 7 But the things that were to me gain, those I have counted as loss [*úñetie: un-gain], by reason of the Christ. 8 But indeed I count all things as loss, by the supreme preciousness of the knowledge about Jesus Christ my Lord. By reason of him I have also let all things be lost to me, and I think about them as refuse [*auhantar: things thrown away], for my gaining Christ 9 and for being found in him, not by my own righteousness, that which comes by the Law, but by [that] which exists by faith in Christ, the rigtheousness which comes from God by the faith, 10 for me to know him and the power of his resurrection and have a part in his sufferings, being shaped by his death 11 – to see if [there] is a way by which it is possible for me to reach to the resurrection from [the] dead.

	12 Lá i acámienyes yando sí, hya i yando sí anaien carna ilvana – mal roitean cenien qui polin mapa ta yan nanye yando mapaina lo Hristo Yésus. 13 Hánor, uan save pa imne i sí amápienyes, mal er nat carin: Panyala et sámanyallo yar caitar ca ni ar rahtala yannar nar epe ni 14 roitean i met, cestala i *paityale – Eruo yalie tarmenna Hristo Yésunen. 15 Etta, elve i nar manwe, alve same natto sina sámasse; ar qui samilde hyana nat sanweldassen, Eru apantuva len yando natto sina. 16 Ono apa tulie sie andave, alve vanta ompa i imya tiesse.
	17 Áni hilya tienyasse, hánor, ar cima i vantar mí lé hilyala i *epemma ya samilde messe. 18 An ear rimbali – quenten pa te rimbave, mal sí quétan pa té arwa nyéreo – i vantar ve ñottoli i tarweo i Hristo.

	12 Not that I have received it even now, or that even now I have been made perfect – but I I am pursuing to see if I can seize that for which I am also seized by Christ Jesus. 13 Brothers, I do not believe concerning myself that I have now seized it, but one thing I do: Putting out of my mind [the things] that lie behind me and reaching towards [those] that are before me 14 I am pursuing the goal, seeking the reward – God's calling to on high by Christ Jesus. 15 Therefore, we that are ready, let us have this matter in mind, and if you have another thing in your thoughts, God will reveal to you also this matter. 16 But after coming thus far, let us walk forward in the same path.
	17 Follow me in my path, brothers, and heed [those] that walk in a manner following the example that you have in us. 18 For [there] are numerous ones – I spoke about them frequently, but now I am speaking about them with grief – that walk as enemies of the cross of the Christ.

19 Mettalta nauva nancarie ar ainolta cumbalta ná, ar alcarelta ná véra nucumnielta, an samilte sámalta i natissen cemende. 20 Pa elve, nórelva ea menelde, yallo yando *lertalve *Rehton, i Heru Yésus Hristo, 21 ye encaruva nalda hroalva náven ve alcarinqua hroarya, túreryanen yanen yando polis panya ilqua nu inse.

19 Their end will be undoing and their god is their belly, and their glory is their own humiliation [/shame], for they have their mind on the things on earth. 20 As for us, our country exists in heaven, from where we also wait for a Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ, 21 who will remake our lowly body to be like his glorious body, with his power with which he can also put everything under himself.

RANTA 4
Etta, hánonyar melde ar milyaine, alassenya ar ríenya – sie tara tance i Herunen, meldar! 
	2 Euoria hortan ar Sintíce hortan: Na er sámo, i Herusse! 3 É arcan yando lyello, sarto ye mole asinye nu i yanwe, á manya tú yet omótiet asinye i evandilyonen, as Hlement ar yando i exi i molir asinye, ion essi ear Parmasse Coiviéva.
	4 Illume na valime i Herusse. Ata quetuvan: Na valime! 5 Lava moicieldan náve sinwa ilye atanin. I Heru hare ná. 

CHAPTER 4
Therefore, my brothers beloved and longed-for, my joy and my crown – thus stand firm by the Lord, beloved ones!
	2 Euodia I exhort and Syntece I exhort: Be of one mind, in the Lord! 3 Indeed I ask also of you, trusty fellow who works with me under the yoke, help them [dual] that have toiled with me for the gospel, together with Clement and also the others that work with me, whose names are in the Book of Life.
	4 Always be happy in the Lord. Again I will say: Be happy! 5 Let your gentleness be known to all men. The Lord is near.

6 Lava muntan *tarasta le, mal ilquasse, hyamiénen ar arciénen as hantale, cara arcandeldar sinwe Erun, 7 ar Eruo raine, ya lahta ilya sanwe, tiruva endalda ar sámalda Yésus Hristonen.
	8 Teldave, hánor: Ilye nati yar nanwe nar, ilye yar lunge nar, ilye yar faile nar, ilye yar poice nar, ilye yar írime nar, ilye pa yar mo quete mai, ilya márie ar ilqua nála valda laitaleo – á sana pa tai!  9 Yar parnelde ar camnelde ar hlasselde ar cennelde inyenen, tai cara, ar i Aino raineva euva aselde.	
	10 Ente, samin túra alasse mí Heru i sí i mettasse eceutielde sanielda pa ni, yen é antanelde sanwe, mal enge munta ya pollelde care.

6 Let nothing disturb you, but in everything, by prayer and by supplication with thanksgiving, make your requests known to God, 7 and God's peace, which surpasses every thought, will watch your heart and your mind by Jesus Christ.
	8 Finally, brothers: All things that are true, all that are serious [lit. heavy], all that are just, all that are pure, all that are desirable, all of which one speaks well, every goodness and everything being worthy of praise – think about them! 9 [The things] which you learnt and you received and you heard and you saw by means of me, do them, and the God of peace will be with you. 
	10 Furthermore, I have great joy in the Lord that now in the end you have renewed your thinking about me, to whom indeed you gave thought, but [there] was nothing that you could do.

11 Lá i quétan pa penie, an apárien lave yain samin farya nin. 12 É istan manen perpere penie, é istan manen same úve. Mi ilqua ar ilye sómar apárien i fóle – manen náve quanta ar manen náve maita véla, manen same úve ar manen perpere penie. 13 Ilye natin samin poldore, yenen anta nin antoryame.
	14 Ananta carnelde mai samiénen ranta asinye şangienyasse. 15 É istalde, Filippiar, i íre i evandilyon minyave túle lenna – íre oanten Maceroniallo – ua enge erya ocombe ya sáme ranta asinye pa antie ar camie, hequa elde erinque. 16 An yando Şessalonicasse, er lú ar lú atta véla, mentanelde ninna maurenyan. 17 Lá i cestean i anna, mal é cestean i yáve ya nauva nótina elden.
	18 Mal samin ilqua ar same úve. Anaien quátina apa camnen ho Epafrolíto i nati lello, níşima olme, írima *yanca, mára Erun. 19 Ar Ainonya quatuva ilya maurelda laryanen alcaresse, Yésus Hristonen. 20 Ainolvan ar Atarelvan na i alcar tennoio ar oi! Násie.
	21 Á *suila ilya aire mi Yésus Hristo. I hánor i ear asinye *suilar le. 22 Ilye i airi, mal or illi i ear i coasse i Ingaranwa, *suilar le!
	23 Nai i Heru Yésus Hristo lisse euva as fairelda!

11 Not that I am talking about lack, for I have learnt to let [the things] which I have suffice for me. 12 Indeed I know how to suffer lack, indeed I know how to have abundance. In everything and all conditions I have learnt the secret – how to be full and how to be hungry alike, how to have abundance and how to suffer lack. 13 For all things I have strength, by [him] who gives me strength [antoryame = strengthening].
	14 And yet you did well by having a part with me in my tribulation. 15 Indeed you know, Philippians, that when the gospel first came to you – when I went away from Macedonia – [there] was not a single congregation that had a part with me concerning giving and receiving, except you alone. 16 For also in Thessalonica, one time and two times alike, you sent to me for my need. 17 Not that I am seeking the gift, but indeed I am seeking the fruit that will be [ac]counted to you.
	18 But I have everything and have abundance. I have been filled after I received from Epafroditus the things from you, a fragrant smell, a desirable sacrifice, pleasing [lit. good] to God. 19 And my God will fill your every need with his riches [lar-ya-nen] in glory, by Jesus Christ. 20 To our God and our Father be the glory forever and ever! Amen.
	21 Greet every holy one in Jesus Christ. The brothers that are with me greet you. 22 All the holy ones, but above all [those] who are in the house of the High King, greet you!
	23 May the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit!
