Paulo Tecetta i Rómeannar
Paul's Letter to the Romans
Revision of December 17, 2018

RANTA 1 
Paulo, Yésus Hristo mól, yálina náven apostel, sátina Eruo evandilyonen, 2 pa ya antanes vanda nóvo ter Erutercánoryar i airi tehtelessen, 3 pa Yondorya, ye oronte Laviro erdello i hrávenen, 4 mal ye náne panyana ve i taura Eruion i Fairenen aireva, ortavénen qualinallon – Yésus Hristo Herulva, 5 ter ye camnelme lisse ar nóme ve apostel, ontien cimie i saviéva mici ilye i nóri pa esserya, 6 mici yar elde nar Yésus Hristo yálinar – 5 illinnar i ear Rómesse ve Eruo meldar, yáline náven airi: Nai samuvalde lisse ar raine ho Eru Atarelva ar i Heru Yésus Hristo. 

CHAPTER 1
Paul, thrall of Jesus Christ, called to be apostle, set aside for God's gospel, 2 of which he gave promise beforehand through his prophets in the holy scriptures, 3 concerning his Son, who arose from David's seed by the flesh, 4 but who was set as the mighty Son of God by the Spirit of holiness, by a raising from [the] dead – Jesus Christ our Lord, 5 through whom we received grace and a place as apostle, to create heeding of the fath among all the nations concerning his name; 6 among whom you are called ones of Jesus Christ – 5 to all that are in Rome as God's beloved, called to be holy ones: May you have grace and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.

	8 Minyave antan hantale Ainonyan ter Yésus Hristo pa illi mici le, an mo carpa pa savielda i quanda mardesse. 9 An Eru, yen nanye núro fairenyanen pa Yondoryo evandilyon, astaronya ná pa manen pen hautie estan le illume hyamienyassen, 10 arcala i teldave ecuva nin tule lenna, Eruo indómenen. 11 An milyan cene le, antaven len anna faireva náveldan tulce, 12 hya i quaptalve tiutale, ilquen i exeo saviénen, savielda ar savienya véla.
	13 Mal hánonyar, uan mere i penuvalde i istya i mernen tule lenna rimbe lúlissen – mal anaien hampa tenna sí – camien lesta yáveva yú mici le, ve mici i hyane Úyúrar. 14 Hellenyain ar Varvaryain véla, sailain ar aucoin nanye rohtando. 15 Etta uryan carien sinwa i evandilyon yú len i ear Rómesse. 16 An uan nucumna pa i evandilyon, an nas Eruo túre rehtien ilquen ye save, i Yúra minyave, tá i Hellenya. 17 An sasse Eruo failie ná apantaina saviénen ar mir savie, ve ná técina: “Mal i faila – saviénen coituvas.” 

	8 Firstly I give thanks to my God through Jesus Christ concerning all among you, for one talks about your faith in the entire world. 9 For God, to whom I am a servant with my spirit concerning the gospel of his Son, is my witness about how I without cease name you always in my prayers, 10 petitioning that finally, it will be possible for me to come to you, by God's will. 11 For I long to see you, to give you a gift of spirit for you to be firm, 12 or that we exchange comfort, each by the faith of the other, your faith and my faith alike. 
	13 But my brothers, I do not wish that you are to lack the knowledge that I wanted to come to you on numerous occasions – but I have been hindered until know – to receive a measure of fruit also among you, as among the other non-Jews. 14 To Greeks and to Barbarians alike, to wise ones and to fools I am a debtor. 15 Therefore I burn to make known the gospel also to you who are in Rome. 16 For I am not humiliated [/ashamed] concerning the gospel, for it is God's power to save everyone who believes, the Jew firstly, then the Greek. 17 For in it God's righteousness is being revealed by faith and into faith, as is written: “But the righteous – by faith he shall have life.”

	18 An Eruo rúşe ná apantaina menello ilya *ainolórienna ar úfailienna atanion i hepir i nanwie undu mi úfaila lé, 19 an ya mo pole ista pa Eru ná carna sinwa mici te, an Eru carne sa sinwa tien. 20 An úcénima nasserya ná aşcénima i ontiello mardeva, an nalte tuntaine i cárine natinen, yú oira túrerya ar valasserya. Etta ualte pole varya inte, 21 an ómu sintelte Eru, ualte antane sen i alcar hya hantale yain náse valda ve Aino, mal sanweltar oller luste ar mornie quante úhanda endalta. 22 Ómu quentelte pa inte i anelte saile, ollelte aucor 23 ar querne Eru Ilfirino alcar mir nat ve emma fírima atano – ar aiwion ar lamnion ar hlicila onnaron.

	18 For God's wrath is being revealed from heaven against all godlessness and unrighteousness of men that keep the truth down in an unrighteous manner, 19 for [that] which one can know about God is made known among them, for God made it known to them. 20 For his invisible true-being is easily seen from the creation of [-va] the world, for they are being perceived by the things made, also his eternal power and divinity. Therefore they cannot defend themselves, 21 for though they knew God, they did not give him the glory or thanksgiving to which he is worthy as Deity, but their thoughts became empty and darkness filled their unintelligent heart. 22 Though they said about themselves that they were wise, they became fools 23 and turned God Immortal's [/the immortal God's] glory into something like the image of mortal man – and of birds and of beasts and of creeping creatures.  

	24 Etta Eru antane te olla, ve endalto íri náner, úpoicien ya tyarne hroalto alcar auta imíca inte, 25 té i quaptaner Eruo nanwie i hurun, ar *tyerner ya náne ontana or ye ontane, ye ná aistaina tennoio. Násie!
	26 Etta Eru antane te olla úmáre mailin, an i nissi mici te quaptaner i lé nasselto lén ara nasse, 27 and sie yú i neri hehtaner nasseo *yuhtie i nisseva ar náner nartane maileltanen quén i exeva, neri as neri, carila ya quarca ná, ar camila intesse i *paityale yan anelte valde loimaltanen.

	24 Therefore God gave them over, as the desires of their heart were, to uncleanness that caused the glory of their body to go be lost [lit. to go away] among themselves, 25 they that exchanged God's truth for the lie, and worshiped [that] which was created above [Him] who created, who is being blessed forever. Amen!
	26 Therefore God gave them over to improper lusts, for the women among them exchanged the manner of their nature [nasse, true-being] for a manner beside nature, 27 and so also the men forsook nature's use of the woman [in generic sense] and were kindled with their lust one for [-va] the other, men with men, doing what is perverse, and receiving in themselves the reward that they were worthy of because of [-nen] their error.

	28 Ar pan úne mára hendultatse same istya pa Eru, Eru antane te olla úmirwa sáman, carieltan úmani nati, 29 an anelte quátine ilya úfailiéno, olciéno, milmeo, ulcuo – queni quante *hrúceno, nahtiéno, costo, *huruleo, olca óreo –  hlussala, 30 quetila ulco pa exi, tevila Eru, narace, turquime, laitala inte, autala ulce nati, lá cimila nostaru, 31 pen hande, racila quettalta, úméle, pen oravie. 32 Ómu istalte Eruo namna – i té i carir taiti nati nar valde qualmeo – lá rie carilte tai, mal yú antalte penestalta in carir tai.

28 And since [it] is not good in their eyes [dual] to have knowledge about God, God gave them over to a worthless mind, for them to do immoral things, 29 for they were filled will all unrighteousness, wickedness, greed, evil –  people full of envy, of murder, of strife, of deceit, of a wicked disposition [óre] – whispering, 30 speaking evil about others, hating God, violent, haughty, praising themselves, inventing evil things, not heeding parents [dual], 31 without understanding, breaking their word, unloving, without mercy. 32 Though they know God's decree [namna: statute] – that those who do such things are worthy of death – not only do they do them, but they also give their support to those that do them.

RANTA 2 
Etta ualye same casta antaven, ilya quén ye name. An i natanen yanen namil exe, namil imle ulca, pan elye ye name care i imye nati. 2 Mal istalve, ve i nanwie ná, in Eruo namie lanta innar carir taiti nati.
	3 Mal ma intyal, a atan ye name i carir taiti nati ómu yú elye care tai, in elye uşuva Eruo namie? 4 Hya ma nattiril i úve moicieryo ar lavieryo ar cóleryo, pan ual ista in Eruo nildie néva tulya lye inwistenna? 5 Mal hrangielyanen ar endanen pen inwis comyal lyen rúşe i auresse rúseva, íre Eruo faile namier nauvar apantane. 6 Ar antauvas ilquenen ve cardaryar nar: 7 oira coivie in cestar alcar ar laitie ar ilfirin sóma, voronwiénen mára moliesse, 8 mal in melir cos ar uar hilya i nanwie, ono hilyar úfailie, euvar rúşe ar aha, 9 roitie ar şangie, i feanna ilya queno ye care ulco, i Yúro minyave ar yú i Hellenyo; 10 mal alcar ar laitie ar raine ilquenen ye care márie, i Yúran minyave ar yú i Hellenyan. 

CHAPTER 2
Therefore you do not have [any] reason to give, every [or, any] person that judges. For by the thing with which you judge another, you judge yourself evil, since you who judge do the same things. 2 But we know, as the truth is, that God's judgement falls upon [those] that do such things.
	3 But do you suppose, O man who judges [the ones] that do such things though you too do them, that you will escape God's judgment? 4 Or do you despise the abundance of his gentleness and his forbearance [lavie: 'letting' = tolerance] and his patience, since you do not know that God's friendliness is trying to lead you to repentance? 5 But by your stubbornness and by a heart without repentance you gather for yourself anger on the day of anger, when God's righteous judgements will be revealed. 6 And he will give to everyone as his deeds are: 7 eternal life to [those] that seek glory and honor and an immortal state, by steadfastness in a good work, 8 but to [those] that love strife and do not follow the truth, but follow unrighteousness, [there] will be anger and wrath, 9 persecution and tribulation, upon the soul of every person that does evil, [the soul] of the Jew first and also that of the Greek; 10 but glory and honor and peace to everyone that does good, to the Jew firstly and also to the Greek.

11 An Eru ua cime cendeler. 12 An i úcarner pen şanye yú nauvar nancarne pen şanye, mal illi i úcarner nu şanye nauvar námine şanyenen. 13 An i hlarir şanye uar i failar epe Eru, mal i carir şanye nauvar cárine faile. 14 An quiquie Úyúrar i uar same şanye nassenen carir yar i şanye quete, queni sine, ómu ualte same şanye, nar şanye inten. 15 Tanalte i samilte i şanyeo nattor técine endaltasse, íre *immotuntielta *vetta aselte ar, vére sanweltassen, ore tien i colilte cáma hya cé penir cáma 16  – i auresse ya Eru name atanion nuldar i evandilyonnen ya inye acárie sinwa, ter Yésus Hristo. 

11 For God does not heed faces [= is not partial]. 12 For those that sinned without law will also be undone without law, but all that sinned under law will be judged by law. 13 For [the ones] that hear law are not the just ones before God, but the ones that do [or, practice] law will be made just. 14 For whenever non-Jews that do not have law by nature do [the things] that the law says, these people, though they do not have [any] law, are a law to themselves. 15 They show that they have the matters of the law written in their heart, when their conscience witnesses with them and, in their own thoughts, [ore tien =] their heart/conscience tells them that they carry guilt or perhaps lack guilt 16 – on the day that God judges the secrets of men by the gospel which I have made known, through Jesus Christ.

	17 Mal qui elye, ye estaina Yúra ná ar sere şanyenna ar laita imle Erusse, 18 ar istal indómerya ar ece lyen name mana mára ná pan acámiel peantie et i Şanyello, 19 ar nalye tanca i nalye tulyala i laceníti, cala in nar morniesse, 20 peantala in penir hande, *peantar lapsion, arwa i canta istyo ar i nanwiéno i Şanyesse – 21 elye ye peanta exin, ma ual peanta imlen? Elye ye peanta: “Áva pile,” ma pilil? 22 Elye ye quete: “Áva race vestale,” ma racil vestale? Elye ye quete i feuyal cordoni, ma pilil cordallon? 23 Elye ye laitaxe i Şanyenen, ma racielyanen i Şanyeva vahtal Eruo alcar? 24 An ve anaie técina: “Eldenen Eruo esse naiquétaina ná imíca i nóri”.
	25 É *oscirie aşea ná qui himyal i Şanye; mal qui racil i Şanye, *oscirielya olólie penie *osciriéva. 26 Qui, tá, quén ye ua *oscirna hepe i Şanyeo faile axani, ma penierya *osciriéva ua nauva nótina ve *oscirie? 

	17 But if you, who are called Jew and rest upon law and praise yourself in God, 18 and you know his will and it is possible for you to judge what is good since you have received instruction out of the Law, 19 and you are sure that you are leading the blind, a light to [those] that are in darkness, 20 instructing those [that] lack understanding, a teacher of babes, having the shape of knowledge and of the truth in the Law – 21 you who instruct others, do you not instruct yourself? You who instruct: “Do not steal,” do you steal? 22 You who say: “Do not break marriage,” do you break marriage? You who say that you abhor idols, do you steal from temples? 23 You who praise yourself by the Law, do you by your breaking of the Law sully God's glory? 24 For as has been written: “Because of [-nen] you God's name is being blasphemed among the nations.”
	25 Indeed circumcision is beneficial if you abide by the Law; but if you break the Law, your circumcision has become lack of circumcision. 26 If, then, a person who is not circumcised keeps the Law's just commandments, will his lack of circumcision not be counted as circumcision?  

27 Ar i *úoscirna quén ye sie ná nassenen, himiénen i Şanye namuva lyé ye same i técina tehtele ar i *oscirie ananta arácie i Şanye. 28 An isse ua Yúra ye sie ná to i etse; ente, *oscirie ua ta ya ea to i etse, i hrávesse. 29 Mal isse ná Yúra ye sie ná i mityasse, ar *oscirierya ná ta i endava, fairenen ar lá tengwanen. Taite quén same laitalerya. lá atanillon, mal Erullo.

27 For the uncircumcised person who is so by nature, will by adhering to the law judge you who have the written scripture and the circumcision and yet have broken the Law. 28 For he is not Jew who is so on the outside; furthermore, circumcision is not that which exists on the outside, in the flesh. 29 But he is a Jew who is so on the inside, and his circumcision is that of the heart, by spirit and not by the letter. Such a person has his praise, not from men, but from God.
 
RANTA 3 
Mana, tá, arya ná i Yúran, hya mana aşea pa i *oscirie?  2 Rimbe nati, mi ilya lé. Minyave Eruo quettar náner panyane hepieltasse. 3 Tá mana? Qui ennoli mici te loitaner save, ma penielta saviéva cé care Eruo voronwe pen túre? 4 Laume! Mal nai Eru nauva hírina voronwa, ómu ilya atan nauva hírina *hurindo, an ná técina: “Tanien i nauval carna faila quettalyainen ar samuval apaire íre nalye námina.”

CHAPTER 3
What, then, is better for the Jew, or what [is] beneficial about the circumcision? 2 Numerous things, in every manner. Firstly God's words were placed in their keeping. 3 Then what? If some persons among them failed to believe, does their lack of belief perhaps make God's faithfulness without power? 4 By no means! But may God be found faithful, though every man will be found a liar, for [it] is written: “In order to show that you will be made just by your words and you will have victory when you are judged.”

5 Mal qui úfailielva care Eruo failie aşcénima, mana quetuvalve? Lau Eru úfaila ná íre tanas rúşerya? Quétan ve atan. 6 Laume! Mana hyana lénen Eru namuva i mar?
	7 Ananta, qui hurunyanen Eruo nanwie olólie ambe minda, alcareryan, manen ná in inye en ná námaina ve úcarindo? 8 Mana vi-pustuva quetiello: “Alve care ulqui, talien i márar!” Sie ennoli naiquetir pa vi, quetila in é carpalve sie, mal taiti queni camuvar faila námielta!

5 But if our unrighteousness highlights God's righteousness [lit. makes God's righteousness easily seen], what are we to say? Surely God is not unrighteous when he shows his wrath? I am speaking like a man. 6 By no means! In [-nen] what other manner will God judge the world?
	7 And yet, if by my lie God's truth has become more prominent, to his glory, how is [it] that I am still being judged as a sinner? 8 What is to stop us from saying: “Let us to evil things, to bring [on] the good things!” Thusly some blaspheme about us, saying that we do speak so, but such  people will receive their just judgment!

9 Tá mana? Ma nalme arya nómesse? Lau! An nóvo equétielme pa Yúrar ar Hellenyar véla in illi mici te nar nu úcare, 10 ve ná técina: “Lá ea faila atan, lá er; 11 ea *úquen ye same tercen, ea *úquen ye cesta Eru, lá erya quén. 12 Illi aránier, illi uo olólier úmirwe; ea úquen ye care moicie, lá erya quén. 13 Lanculta láta sapsa ná; lambaltanen uhúrielte. Hloire leucaron ea ca péltat, 14 ar antolta ná quanta hútiéno ar sáriéno. 15 Talultat nát linte ulyaven serce. 16 Atalante ar angayasse nar tieltassen, ar i tie raineva ualte isintie. 18 Lá ea rucie Erullo epe hendultat.” 

9 Then what? Are we [excl. = we Jews] in a better place [= position]? Not at all! For beforehand we have said about Jews and Greeks alike that all among them are under sin, 10 as is written: “[There] does not exist [any] just man, not one; 11 [there] is nobody that has insight, [there] is nobody that seeks God, not a single person. 12 All have strayed, all together have become worthless [ú-mirwe 'un-precious'], [there] is nobody that does kindness, not a single person. 13 Their throat is an open grave; with their tongue they have lied. Venom of snakes is behind their lips [dual], 14 and their mouth is full of cursing and of bitterness. 15 Their feet are swift to pour out blood. 16 Ruin and misery are on their ways, and the way of peace they have not known. 18 There is no fear of God before their eyes.”

	19 Istalve in ilqua ya i Şanye quete, quetis innar nar nu i Şanye, pustien ilya anto, ar i quanda mar nauva *námima Erun, paimen. 20 Etta cardainen şanyeo ua ea hráve ya nauva carna faila epe se, an şanyenen tule i istya úcareva. 21 Mal sí, pen şanye, Eruo failie anaie tanana, ve ná *vettaina lo i Şanye ar i Erutercánor – 22 Eruo failie saviénen Yésus Hristosse, illin i savir. An *úquen arya ná lá exe, 23 pan illi úacárier ar loitar Eruo alcar. 24 Ve anna, lisseryanen, nalte cárine faile i *nanwerenen Yésus Hristosse, 25 ye Eru panyane ve *cámayanca ter savie serceryasse. Sie tanumnes failierya, apseniénen i úcari yar martaner i vanwiesse 26 lan Eru tanne cóle, tanien failierya i lúmesse ya ea sí, náven faila yú íre quetis faila ye i saviéno Yésusse ná.
	27 Masse, tá, i *immolaitie ná? Lá ea nóme san. Mana şanyenen? Ta cardaron? Lá, mal i şanyenen saviéva. 28 An notilve i atan came failie saviénen, lá cardainen şanyeo. 29 Hya ma Eru rie i Yúraron ná? Ma uas i Aino yú quenion i nórion? E náse i Aino yú quenion i nórion, 30 pan Eru ná er, ye quete faile i *oscirnar et saviello, ar i uar *oscirne, saviénen. 31 Ma sie panyalve oa şanye savielvanen? Laume, mal tulcalve şanye!

	19 We know that everything that the Law says, it says to [those] that are under the Law, to stop every mouth, and the whole world will be culpable [*námima =' judgeable'] to God, for punishment. 20 Therefore by deeds of law [there] is no flesh which will be made just before him, for by law comes the knowledge of sin. 21 But now, without law, God's justness has been shown, as is being witnessed by the Law and the Prophets – 22 God's justness by faith in Jesus Christ, to all that believe. For no one is better than another, 23 since all have sinned and fall short of God's glory. 24 As a gift, by his grace, they are made just by the ransom in Jesus Christ, 25 whom God put as a guilt-offering through faith in his blood. Thus he was going to show us his righteousness, by forgiving the sins that happened in the past 26 while God showed patience, to show his righteousness at the time which is now, to be just also when he pronounces just [anyone] who is of the faith in Jesus. 
	27 Where, then, is the self-praise? [There] is not [any] place for it. By what law? That of acts? No, but by the law of faith. 28 For we reckon that man receives righteousness by faith, not by acts of law. 29 Or is God only of the Jews? Is he not also the God of people of the nations? Indeed he is also the God of people of the nations, 30 since God is one, who pronounces just the circumcised ones out of faith, and [those] that are not circumcised, by faith. 31 Do we thusly put away law by our faith? By no means, but we establish law!

RANTA 4 
Mana, tá, quetuvalve pa Avraham, atarelva i hrávenen? 2 An au Avraham náne carna faila cardainen, lertiévanes laita inse, mal lá epe Eru. 3 An mana i Tehtele quete? “Avraham sáve i Hérusse, ar ta náne nótina sen ve failie.” 4 Mal yen mole i *paityale ná nótina, lá ve lisse, mal ve rohta. 5 Mal yen ua mole, mal save yesse care faila i *ainolóra, savierya ná nótina ve failie. 6 Sie yú Lavir quete pa i alasse i atano yen Eru note failie pen cardar: 7 “Valime nar i queni ion *şanyelóre cardar nar apsénine ar ion úcari anaier túpine; 8 valima i quén yeo úcare i Héru laume cimuva.”

CHAPTER 4
What, then, are we to say about Abraham, our father by the flesh? 2 For if Abraham was made just by deeds, he would have been able to praise himself, but not before God. 2 For what does the Scripture say? “Abraham believed in the Lord, and that was counted to him as justice.” 4 But to [the one] that works the reward is counted, not as grace, but as a debt. 5 But to [the one] that does not work, but believes in [Him] that makes just the godless one, his faith is counted as righteousness. 6 Thus David as well says about the joy of the man to whom God accounts righteousness without deeds: 7 “Happy are the people whose lawless deeds are forgiven and whose sins have been covered; 8 happy the person whose sin the Lord does not heed at all.”

	9 Ma alasse sina túle rie *oscarinnar, hya yú queninnar i uar *oscirne? An quetilve: “Avrahámen savierya náne nótina ve failie.” 10 Manen, tá, sa náne nótina? Íre anes *oscirna, hya íre únes *oscirna? Lá íre anes *oscirna, mal íre únes *oscirna! 11 Ar camnes tanwa, *oscirie, ve *lihta failiéno i saviénen ya sámes íre en únes *oscirna, náveryan atar illion i sámer savie pen oscirie, tyarien failie náve nótina tien, 12 ar yú atar *oscirnaron, lá rie in himyar *oscirie, mal yú in hilyar Avraham atarelva i tiesse saviéno yasse vantanes nó anes *oscirna.
	13 An lá Şanyenen Avraham hya erderya same i vanda pa olie aryon mardo, mal ter i failie saviénen. 14 An au i himyar şanye nar aryoni, savie olólie lusta ar i vanda anaie hehtana. 15 An i Şanye tyare rúşe, mal yasse lá ea şanye, yú lá ea ongwe.

	9 Did this joy come to [the] circumcised alone, or also to people that are not circumcised? For we say: “To Abraham his faith was counted as righteousness.” 10 How, then, was it counted to him? When he was circumcised, or while he was not circumcised? Not while he was circumcised, but while he was not circumcised! 11 For he received a sign, circumcision, as a seal of righteousness by the faith that he had while he still was not circumcised, for him to be father of all that have faith without circumcision, to cause righteousness to be counted to them, 12 and also father of circumcized ones, not only to those that adhere to circumcision, but also to those that follow Abraham our father in the path of faith in which he walked before he was circumcised. 
	13 For [it is] not by the Law Abraham or his seed has the promise about becoming heir to a world, but through the righteousness by faith. 14 For if those that adhere to law are heirs, faith has become empty and the promise has been abandoned. 15 For the law causes anger, but where [there] does not exist [any] law, [there] also does not exist crime. 

	16 Sie i vanda saviénen ná, náveryan Erulissenen, carien sa tanca ilya erden Avrahámo, lá rie ta ya himya i Şanye, mal yú ta ya himya Avrahámo savie. Náse i atar illion mici vi, 17 ve anaie técina: “Apánien lye atar rimbe nórion” – epe Eru yesse sáves, ye care i qualinar coirie ar yalir i nati yar lá ear ve au engelte. 18 Estel pella estelden sámes savie náveo atar rimbe nórion, ve náne quétina: “Sie nauva erdelya.” 19 Ar ómu savierya ua firne, túnes véra hroarya, ya náne ve qualina íre anes hare loannar tuxa, ar yú tunes manen qualin Saro móna né. 20 Mal Eruo vandanen uas talante peniesse saviéva, mal náne carna taura savieryanen, 21 ar anes tanca in isse ye antane i vanda yú sáme i túre carien ve hé quente. 22 Etta ta náne “nótina sen ve failie”. 

	16 Thus the promise is by faith, for it to be by grace, to make it firm for all the seed of Abraham, not only that which adheres to the Law, but also that which adheres to Abraham's faith. He is the father of all among us, 17 as has been written: “I have put you [as] father of numerous nations” – before God in whom he believed, who makes the dead alive and calls the things that do not exist as if they existed. 18 Beyond hope by hope he had faith of being father of numerous nations, as was said: “So your seed will be.” 19 And though his faith did not fade, he noticed his own body, which was like dead when he was close to a hundred years, and he also perceived how dead Sarah's womb was. 20 But by God's promise he did not falter in lack of faith, but he was made mighty by his faith, 21 and he was certain that he who gave the promise also had the power to do as he said. 22 Therefore that was “counted to him as righteousness”. 

	23 Úne técina pa sé erinqua i ta náne nótina sen, 24 mal yú pa elve. Nauvas nótina elven – i quenin i savilve sesse ye ortane Yésus Herulva qualinallon. 25 Hé náne antana olla ongwelvainen ar náne ortana návelvan quétine faile.

	23 It was not written about him alone that that was counted to him, 24 but also about us. It will be counted to us – to the people who believe in him that raised Jesus our Lord from [the] dead. 25 He was given over because of our crimes and was raised for us to be pronounced just.

RANTA 5 
Etta, pan anaielve quétine faile saviénen, nai samuvalve raine as Eru, Yésus Hristo Herulvanen. 2 Ter hé yú samilve ando saviéva tulyala i Erulissenna yasse sí tarilve; ar nai laituvalve inwe pa i estel alcaro Eruo. 3 É lá rie ta, mal nai yú laituvalve inwe pa i roitier, istala i roitie anta voronwie, 4 voronwie tulya tyastana sómanna, ar tyastana sóma anta estel. 5 Ar i estel ua loituva, an Eruo melme anaie ulyana mir endalva i Aire Feanen ya náne antana ven.

CHAPTER 5
Therefore, since we have been pronounced just by faith, may we have peace with God, by Jesus Christ our Lord. 2 Through him we also have a gate of faith leading to the grace in which we now stand; and may we praise ourselves as concerns the hope of the glory of God. 3 Indeed not only that, but may we also praise ourselves concerning the persecutions, knowing that persecution gives endurance, 4 endurance leads to a tested condition, and a tested condition gives hope. 5 And the hope will not fail, for God's love has been poured out into our heart by the Holy Spirit that was given to us.

6 An é Hristo, íre en anelve milye, qualle *ainolóre atanin íre i lúme túle. 7 An mo ua lintave cile quale yando quenen ye faila ná – hya cé mo é verya quale quenen ye mane ná. 8 Mal Eru tana ven melmerya lé sinasse, i lan en anelve úcarindor, Hristo qualle ven. 9 Pan anaielve cárine faile serceryanen, ta ita ambe nauvalve rehtane issenen i rúşello. 10 An qui, íre anelve ñottor, raine náne tulcana imbi vi ar Eru i qualmenen Yondoryo, ta ita ambe nauvalve rehtane coivieryanen sí íre samilve raine óse. 11 Ar lá rie ta, mal yú laitalvexer Erusse, ter Yésus Hristo Herulva, ter ye raine sí anaie tulcana ven. 13 An úcare enge i mardesse nó i Şanye, mal úcare ua nótina aiquenna íre lá ea şanye. 14 Ananta qualme sáme túre Atanello tenna Móses, yú or i uar úcarner mí lé ongweo Atano, ye ná emma yeo tulumne. 

6 For indeed Christ, when we were still weak, died for godless men when the time came. 7 For one does not quickly choose to die even for a person who is just – or maybe one indeed dares to die for a person who is good. 8 But God shows us his love in this manner, that while we were still sinners, Christ died for us. 9 Since we have been made righteous by his blood, that much more we shall be saved by him from the wrath. 10 For if, when we were enemies, peace was established between us and God by the death of his Son, that much more we shall be saved by his life now that [lit. now when] we have peace with him. 11 And not just that, but we also bless ourselves in God, through Jesus Christ our Lord, through whom peace has now been established for us. 13 For sin existed in the world before the Law, but sin is not counted against anyone when [there] does not exist [any] law. 14 And yet death had power from Adam [Atan] until Moses, also over the ones that did not sin in the manner of the crime of Adam, who is an image of [the one] that was going to come. 

	15 Mal natto i ongweo ua ve natto i anno. An ómu rimbali qualler er queno ongwenen, i lisse Eruo ar i anna i lissenen er queno – Yésus Hristo – náner ita ambe úvie rimbalin. 16 Ente, i anno natto ua ve i natto yeo úcarne. An i anan hilyala erya ongwe talle namie cámava, mal i anna hilyala rimbe ongwi tulya návenna carna faila. 17 An qui i er queno ongwenen qualme sáme túre issenen, ita ambe i camir lisseryo úve ar i anna failiéva turuvar ter sana er quén – Yésus Hristo.
	19 An ve er ongwenen ilye atani náner námine ulce, mi imya lé er faila cardanen ilye atani nar quétine faile, coivien. 19 An síve rimbali náner cárine úcarindor pan erya nér rance i canwar, tambe rimbali yú nauvar cárine faile pan erya quén cimne tai. 20 Mal i Şanye túle carien ongwe úvea. Ono yasse úcare úvea né, Erulisse náne en ambe úvea. 21 I enne náne i sive úcare turne qualmenen, tambe Erulisse turumne failiénen, tálala oira coivie Yésus Hristo Herulvanen.

	15 But the matter of the crime is not like the matter of the gift. For though numerous ones died by one person's crime, the grace of God and the gift by the grace of one person – Jesus Christ – were much more abundant to numerous ones. 16 Furthermore, [the] matter of the gift is not like the matter of [the one] that sinned. For the doom following a single crime brought a judgement of guilt, but the gift following many crimes leads to being made just. 17 For if by the one person's crime death had power by him, much more [those] that receive the abundance of his grace and the gift of righteousness will rule through that one person – Jesus Christ.
	19 For as by one crime all men were judged evil, in the same manner by one righteous deed all men are said [or, pronounced] just, to life. 19 For like numerous ones were made sinners since a single man broke the commands, so numerous ones are also made just since a single person heeded them. 20 But the Law came to make crime abundant. However, where sin was abundant, grace was still more abundant. 21 The purpose was that as sin ruled by death, so grace was going to rule by righteousness, bringing eternal life by Jesus Christ our Lord.

RANTA 6 
Mana, tá, quetuvalve? Ma lemyuvalve úcaresse, carien Erulisse úvea? 2 Laume! Elve i qualler pa úcare, manen en coituvalve sasse?  3 Hya ualde ista in illi mici vi i náner sumbane mir Hristo Yésus náner sumbane mir qualmerya? 4 Etta anelve panyane sapsasse óse sumbieryanen. Sie, ve yú i Hristo náne ortana qualinallon i Ataro alcarnen, yú elve vantumner vinya coiviesse. 5 An qui utúlielve uo óse qualmesse ve qualmerya, yú nauvalve óse enortavesse ve enortaverya. 6 An istalve i yára atanelva náne tarwestana óse, panien oa i hroa úcareva, vi-pustien návello móli nu úcare. 7 An ye aquálie anaie leryana úcarello.
	6 Ente, qui aquálielve as Hristo, savilve i yú coituvalve óse. 7 An istalve i sí, íre i Hristo anaie ortana qualinallon, uas quale ata; qualme ua ambe same túre or se. 10 An i qualme ya qualles, qualles pa úcare erya lú ar tennoio, mal i coivie ya coitas, coitas Erun. 11 Mi imya lé yú elde: nota inde ve qualine úcaren, mal ve coirie Erun, mi Hristo Yésus. 

CHAPTER 6
What, then, are we to say? Are we to remain in sin, to make grace abundant? 2 By no means! We that died concerning sin, how will we still live in it? 3 Or do you not know that all among us that were baptized into Christ Jesus were baptized into his death? 4 Therefore we were put in a grave with him by his baptism. Thus, like also the Christ was raised from [the] dead by the glory of the Father, also we were going to walk in a new life. 5 And if we have come together with him in a death like his death, we shall also be with him in a resurrection like his resurrection. 6 For we know that our old man was crucified with him, to put away the body of sin, to stop us from being thralls under sin. 7 For [he] who has died has been freed from sin. 
	6 Furthermore, if we have died with Christ, we believe that we will also live with him. 7 For we know that now, when the Christ has been raised from [the] dead, he does not die again; death does not [any]more have power over him. 10 For the death that he died, he died concerning sin a single time and forever, but the life that he lives, he lives for God. 11 In the same manner also you: count yourselves as dead to sin, but as living to God, in Christ Jesus.

	12 Etta áva lave úcaren ture fírima hroalda, lengieldan íreryainen. 13 Ente, áva anta hroarantaldar úcaren ve carmar úfailiéva, mal á anta inde Erun ve i coirear qualinallon, yú hroarantaldar Erun ve carmar failiéva. 14 An úcare ua le-turuva, an ualde nu şanye, mal nu Erulisse.
	15 Mana hilya? Ma úcaruvalve, pan ualve nu şanye, mal nu Erulisse? Laume! 16 Ma ualde ista i qui antalde inde aiquenen ve móli, carien ya quetis, nalde móliryar pan carilde ya quetis – cé úcareo móli, tulyala qualmenna, cé canwacimiéno móli, tulyala failienna. 17 Mal na hantale Erun: Anelde móli úcareo, mal cimnelde holmo i nostale peantiéva yan anelde antane olla. 18 Apa anelde leryane úcarello, ollelde móli failiéno. 

	Therefore do not let sin rule your mortal body, for you to behave by its desires. 13 Furthermore, do not give your members [lit. body-parts] to sin as weapons of unrighteousness, but give yourselves to God as the living ones from [the] dead, also your members to God as weapons of righteousness. 14 For sin will not rule you, for you are not under law, but under grace.
	15 What follows? Are we to sin, since we are not under law, but under grace? By no means! 16 Do you not know that if you give yourselves to anyone as thralls, to do what he says, you are his thralls since you do what he says – perhaps thralls of sin, leading to death, perhaps thralls of obedience [lit. command-heeding], leading to righteousness. 17 But thanks be to God: You were thralls of sin, but you sincerely heeded the kind of instruction to which you were given over. 18 After you were freed from sin, you became thralls of righteousness. 

19 Carpan lenna mi lé Atanion, pan hrávelda milya ná. An ve carnelde hroarantaldar móli úpoiciéno ar şanyeraciéno, ya tulyane amba şanyeracienna, sí á panya hroarantaldar ve móli failiéno, ya tulyuva airenna. 20 An íre anelde móli úcareo, anelde lére pa failie. 21 Mal mana náne i yáve ya tá sámelde? Nati pa yar nalde sí nucumne, an i metta tane nation qualme ná! 22 Ono sí, pan anelve leryane úcarello mal olólier móli Erun, samilde yávelda tulyala airenna, ar i metta nauva oira coivie. 23 An ya úcare paitya qualme ná, mal Eruo anna oira coivie ná, mi Hristo Yésus Herulva.

19 I speak to you in the manner of Men, since your flesh is weak. For like you made your body-parts thralls of uncleanness and lawbreaking, which led to more lawbreaking, now set your body-parts as thralls of righteousness, which will lead to holiness. 20 For when you were thralls of sin, you were free concerning righteousness. 21 But what was the fruit that you then had? Things of which you are now humiliated [/ashamed], for the end of those things is death! 22 But now, since you were freed from sin but have become servants to God, you have your fruit leading to holiness, and the end will be eternal wife. 23 For what sin pays is death, but God's gift is eternal life, in Christ Jesus our Lord.

RANTA 7 
Hya ualde ista, hánonyar – an quetin innar istar şanye – in i Şanye ture ve heru or atan ter i quanda lúme ya coitas?  2 An nís ye evérie nerenna ná nútina veruryanna lan i nér coirea ná, mal qui verurya quale, i nís ná lehtana i veruo şanyello. 3 Sie, tá, lan verurya coirea ná, mo quetumne in i nís arácie vestale qui antanesexe hyana neren. Mal qui verurya quale, náse léra i şanyello, ar uas race vestale qui veryas hyana nerenna. 
	4 Sie, hánonyar, yú elde oller qualine i Şanyen i Hristo hroanen, náveldan exeo, isse ye náne ortana qualinallon, colielvan yáve Erun. 5 An íre anelve i hrávesse, úcareo mailer yar náner valtaine i Şanyenen móler hroarantalvassen, vi-tyarila cole yáve qualmen. 6 Mal sí anaielve lertane i Şanyello, pan aquálielve ho ta yanen anelve nútine, návelvan núroli mi vinya lé, i fairenen, ar lá mí yára lé, tengwainen. 

CHAPTER 7
Or do you not know, my brothers – for I speak to [those] that know law – that the Law rules as lord over a man though[out] the entire time that he lives? 2 For a woman who has gotten married to a man is bound to her husband while the man is alive, but if her husband dies, the woman is freed from the law of the husband. 3 Thus, then, while her husband is alive, one was going to say that the woman has broken marriage if she gave herself to another man. But if her husband dies, she is free from the law, and she does not break marriage if she gets married to another man.
	4 Thus, my brothers, you as well became dead to the Law by the body of Christ, for you to be another's, he who was raised from [the] dead, for us to bear fruit to God. 5 For when we were in the flesh, the lusts of sin which were being strirred by the Law worked in our body-parts, causing us to bear fruit to death. 6 But now we have been freed from the Law, since we have died from that with which we were bound, for us to be servants in a new manner, by the spirit, and not in the old manner, by letters.

	7 Mana, tá, quetuvalve? I Şanye úcare ná? Laume! Mal úcare uan sinte qui lá i Şanyenen. An milcie uan sinte au i Şanye ua quente: “Áva na milca!” 8 Mal úcare, arwa eciéno i axannen, ontane inyesse milcie ilya nostaleo, an oa şanyello úcare qualina né. 9 É enge lúme yasse anen coirea oa şanyello, mal íre i axan túle, úcare nanwenne coivienna, mal inye qualle. 10 Ar i axan ya náne coivien, ta hirnen náne qualmen. 11 An úcare, íre camnes ecie i axannen, ni-şahtane ar ni-nacante sánen. 12 Etta i Şanye aire ná, ar i axan aire ar faila ar mára. 

	7 What, then, are we to say? The Law is sin? By no means! But sin I did not know if not by the Law. For greed I did not now if the Law did not say: “Do not be greedy!” 8 But sin, having an opportunity by the commandment, created in me greed of every kind, for away from law sin was dead. 9 Indeed [there] was a time in which I was alive away from law, but when the commandment came, sin returned to life, but I died. 10 For the commandment which was for life, that I found was for death. 11 For sin, when it received an opportunity by the commandment, seduced me and killed me by it. 12 Therefore the Law is holy, and the commandment holy and righteous and good.

	13 Ma ya mára né tyarne nin qualme? Laume! Mal úcare carne sie, tyarila qualme nisse yanen mára ná, apantien úcareo nasse, ar náveryan *úcarunqua han lesta i axannen. 14 An ve istalve, i Şanye i Faireo ná, mal inye i hráveo ná, vácina nu úcarenna. 15 An ya molin uan hanya. An ya merin, ta uan care, mal ya tevin, ta ná ya carin. 16 Ono qui ya uan mere ná ya carin, náquetin as i Şanye i nas mára. 17 Mal sí ye mole sa ua ambe ní, mal úcare ya mare nisse. 18 An istan in inyesse, ta ná, hrávenyasse, mare munta mára; an ece nin mere, mal ua ece nin mole ya mára ná. 19 An i márie ya merin uan care, mal i ulco ya uan mere, ta carin. 20 Mal qui ya inye ua mere ná ya carin, ye care sa ua ambe ní, mal úcare márala nisse.

	13 Did that which was good cause death to me? By no means! But sin did so, causing death in me by [that] which is good, to reveal what sin really is [úcareo nasse: sin's true-being], and for it to be sinful beyond measure by the commandment. 14 For as we know, the Law is of the Spirit, but I am of the flesh, sold under sin. 15 For what I work I do not understand. For [that] which I wish, that I do not do, but [that] which I hate, that is what I do. 16 But if [that] which I do not want is what I do, I assent with the Law that is it good. 17 But now [he] who works it is no more I, but sin which dwells in me. 18 For I know that in me, that is, in my flesh, [there] dwells nothing good; for it is possible for me to desire, but it is not possible for me to work [that] which is good. 19 For the good that I want I do not do, but the evil that I do not want, that I do. 20 But if [that] which I do not want is what I do, [the one] who does it is no more I, but sin dwelling in me.

	21 Sie hirin in ea şanye sina: Íre merin care ya vanima ná, ulco caita hare ninna. 22 É samin alasse Eruo Şanyesse mitya ataninyanen,  23 mal cenin hroarantanyassen hyana şanye ohtacarila sámanyanna ar ni-carila mól şanyen úcareo ya ea mi hroarantanyar. 24 Angayanda nér ye nanye! Man ni-rehtuva sina hroallo qualmeva? 25 Hantale Erun ter Yésus Hristo Herulva! É inye ná mól i şanyeo Eruo sámanyanen, mal hrávenyanen, i şanyeo úcareo.

	21 This I find that [there] exists this law: When I wish to do what is proper, evil lies near to me. 22 Indeed I have joy in God's Law by my inner man, 23 but I see in my body-parts another law making war against my mind and making me a slave to the law of sin which exists in my body-parts. 24 Miserable man that I am! Who will save me from this body of death? 25 Thanks to God through Jesus Christ our Lord! Indeed I am a slave of the law of God by my mind, but by my flesh, of the law of sin.

RANTA 8 
Sie i nar mi Hristo Yésus lá nauvar námine ulce. 3 An i faireo şanye ya anta coivie mi Hristo Yésus eleryanie lye i şanyello úcareva ar qualmeva. 4 An ya i Şanye ua polle care, pan anes milya i hrávenen, Eru carne mentavénen véra Yondorya mi ya náne vávea *úcarunqua hráveo, ar pa úcare. Namnes úcare ulca i hrávesse. 4 Sie i Şanyeo faila axan polle ole nanwa elvesse i vantar, lá i hrávenen, mal i Aire Feanen. 5 An i nar i hráveo cimir i hráveo nattor, mal i nar i faireo, i faireo nattor.

CHAPTER 8
Thus [those] that are in Christ Jesus will not be judged evil. 3 For the law of the spirit which gives life in Christ Jesus has freed you [sg.] from the law of sin and of death. 4 For what the Law could not do, since it was weak by the flesh, God did by sending his own Son in [that] which was similar to sinful flesh, and concerning sin. He judged sin evil in the flesh. 4 Thus the just command of the Law could become real in us that walk, not by the flesh, but by the Holy Spirit. 5 For [those] that are of the flesh heed the matters of the flesh, but [those] that are of the spirit, the matters of the spirit. 

6 Cime i hráve tala qualme, mal cime i faire tala coivie ar raine, 7 an ye cime i hráve ná cotya Erun, an i hráve ua luhta Eruo şanyen; é ta ua ece san. 8 Etta i nar i hrávesse uar pole fasta Eru.
	9 Mal elde uar i hrávesse, mal i fairesse, qui Eruo faire mare lesse. Mal qui aiquen ua same i Hristo faire, isse ua senya. 10 Mal qui i Hristo ea lesse, i hroa é qualina ná, úcarenen, mal i faire coivie ná, failiénen. 11 Qui i faire yeo ortane Yésus qualinallon mare lesse, ye ortane Hristo Yésus qualinallon yú caruva fírime hroaldar coirie, faireryanen ya mare lesse.

To heed the flesh brings death, but to heed the spirit brings life and peace, 7 for [he] who heeds the flesh is hostile to God, for the flesh does not bow to God's law; indeed that is not possible for it. 8 Therefore [those] that are in the flesh are not able to please God.
	9 But you are not in the flesh, but in the spirit, if God's spirit dwells in you. But if anyone does not have the Christ's spirit, he is not his [= does not belong to him]. 10 But if the Christ exists in you, the body is indeed dead, by sin, but the spirit is life, by justness. 11 If the spirit of [him] that raised Jesus from [the] dead dwells in you, [he] who raised Christ Jesus [from] the dead will also made your mortal bodies alive, by his spirit that dwells in you.

	12 Etta, hánor, é nalve rohtalie, mal lá i hráven, coitien i hrávenen. 13 An qui coitalde i hrávenen, qualuvalde, mal qui i fairenen nahtalde hroaldo cardar, coituvalde. 14 An illi i nar tulyaine lo Eruo faire, té nar Eruo yondor. 15 An ualde came mólo faire, ata tyarila caure, mal camnelde faire náveva cíline ve yondor, i faire yanen yamilve: “Appa, Atar!” 16 I faire imma astaro ná as fairelva i nalve Eruhíni. 17 Ar qui nalve híni, nalve yú aryoni – é aryoni Eruo, mal aryoni as i Hristo, qui perperilve óse, camielvan yú alcar óse.

	12 Therefore, brothers, we are indeed debtors, but not to the flesh, in order to live by the flesh. 13 For if you live by the flesh, you will die, but if by the spirit you kill the deeds of your body,, you will live. 14 For all that are being led by God's spirit, they are God's sons. 15 For you did not receive a thrall's spirit, again causing fear, but you received a spirit of being chosen as sons, the spirit by which we cry: “Abba, Father!” 16 The spirit itself is a witness with our spirit that we are God's children. 17 And if we are children, we are also heirs – indeed God's heirs, and heirs with the Christ, if we suffer with him, for us to receive also glory with him.

	18 Etta notin i perperier lúme sino ve munta sestane as i alcar ya nauva apantana elvesse. 19 An uryala írenen Ontie yéta ompa i apantienna Eruo yondoiva. 20 An Ontie náne panyana nu úaşea sóma, lá véra şelmaryanen mal lo ye panyane sa nu ta, ómu arwa estelo: 21 i yú Ontie imma nauva leryana návello mól hastiéno mir i alcarinqua lérie Eruhínion. 22 An istalve manen i quanda Ontie ñónea uo ar ea naicesse uo tenna sí. 23 Lá rie ta, mal yú elve i samir i minye yáve – ta ná, i Faire – elve ñonar inwesse, íre yétalve ompa návenna cíline ve yondor – i lehtie hroalvallo *nanwerenen. 24 An anelve rehtane estel sinasse; mal estel ya mo cene ua estel, an íre quén cene nat, manen samis estel san? 25 Mal qui samilve estel yan ualve cene, yétalve ompa sanna voronwiénen.
	26 Mí imya lé i Faire yú vi-manya íre nalve milye. Ualve ista mana carumnelve mai arciénen sa, mal i Faire imma arca ven, alaquétime quettainen. 27 Mal ye cesta i endar ista mana i Faireo sanwe ná, pan Eruo şelmanen arcas i airin. 

	18 Therefore I count the sufferings of this time as nothing compared to [lit. 'with'] the glory that will be revealed in us. 19 For with a burning desire Creation looks forward to the revealing of God's sons. 20 For Creation was put under [= subjected to] an useless [ú-aşea, un-beneficial] state, not by its own will but by [the One] who put it under that, although having a hope: 21 that also creation itself will be freed from being a thrall of corruption into the glorious freedom of God's children. 22 For we know how the entire creation is groaning together and is in pain together until now. 23 Not only that, but also we who have the first fruit – that is, the Spirit – we groan in ourselves, when we look forward to being chosen as sons – the release from our body by ransom. 24 For we were saved in this hope; but a hope that one sees is not hope, for when a person sees a thing, how does he have hope for it? 25 But if we have hope for that which we do not see, we are looking forward to it with endurance.
	26 In the same manner the Spirit also helps us when we are weak. We do not know what we would do well by requesting it, but the Spirit itself petitions for us, with unutterable words. 27 But he who searches the hearts know what the thought of the Spirit is, since by God's will it makes request for the holy ones.

	28 Istalve in Eru tyare ilye nati mole uo in melir Eru, márieltan – i nar yáline enneryan. 29 An té i sintes nóvo yú cildes nóvo, náveltan cátine ve i emma Yondoryo, carila sé i minnóna mici rimbe hánor; 30 mal té i cildes nóvo, yú yaldes, ar té i yaldes, yú carnes faile, ar té i carnes faile, yú carnes alcarinque.
	31 Mana, tá, quetuvan pa nati sine? Qui Eru ea aselve, man taruva venna? 32 Ye ua oráve yando véra Yondoryasse mal antane se olla i márien illion mici ve, manen ná i uas yú antauva ven ilye hyane nati? 33 Man quetuva ulco innar Eru icílie? Eru ná ye equétie te faile; 34 man ná ye name te ulce? Hristo Yésus ná ye qualle; hya arya, náse ye náne ortana qualinallon, ye ea Eruo formasse, ye yú arca ven. 

	28 We know that God causes all things to work together for [those] who love God, for their good – the [ones] that are called for his purpose. 29 For the ones that he knew beforhand he also chose beforehand, for them to be fashioned according to the image of his Son, making him the first-born among numerous brothers; 30 but the ones that he chose beforehand, he also called, and the ones that he called, he also made righteous, and those that he made righteous, he also made glorious. 
	31 What, then, am I to say about these things? If God is with us, who will stand against us? 32 [The one] who did not have mercy even his own Son but gave him over for the good of all among us, how is [it] that he will [= would] not give us all other things? 33 Who will speak evil against [those] that God as chosen? God is [the one] who has spoken [= pronounced] them just; 34 who is [the one] that judge them evil? Christ Jesus is [the one] who died, or better, he is [the one] who was raised from the dead, who is at God's right hand, who also makes petition for us.
 
	35 Man vi-mapuva oa i Hristo melmello? Ma şangie hya şahtie hya roitie hya saicele hya heldie hya raxe hya macil caruva sie? 36 Ve anaie técina: “Elyenen nalme nahtaine ter i quanda aure; anaielme nótine ve mámar nahtien.” 37 Ono mi ilye sine nati samilve i apaire, yenen méle vi. 38 An nanye tanca i munta – qualme hya coivie hya valar hya héri hya yar ear sí hya yar tuluvar, hya túri, 39 hya tumnie hya ilya hyana ontana nat – poluva vi-mapa oa Eruo melmello ya ea mi Hristo Yésus Herulva.

	35 Who will take us away from the love of the Christ? Will tribulation or pressure or persecution or famine or nakedness or danger or sword do so? 36 As has been written: “Because of you we are being slain throughout the whole day; we have been counted as sheep for slaughter.” 37 But in all these things we have the victory, by [the one] that loved us. 38 For I am sure that nothing – death or life or angels or lordships, or [the things] that are now or [the things] that will come, or powers, 39 or depth or every [/any] other created thing –  will be able to take us away from God's love which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

RANTA 9 
I nanwie nyáran i Hristosse – uan húra, pan *immotuntienya astarmonya ná asinye, i Aire Feasse – 2 i samin túra naire ar lemyala naice endanyasse. 3 An ece nin mere in inye náne aucirna ve húna i Hristollo márien hánonyaron, nossenya i hrávenen, 4 i nar Israelyar, i náner cíline ve híni ar samir i alcar ar i véri ar i antave i Şanyeva ar i núromolie ar i vandar, 5 té i samir i atari ar illon i Hristo same ontalerya i hrávenen. Nai Eru, ye or illi ea, nauva aistana tennoio! Násie!
	6 Mal i natto ua ve au Eruo quetta oloitie. An lá illi i samir ontalelta Israello nar nanwave Israel. 7 Ente, illi mici te uar híni návenen Avrahámo erde, mal: “Ya nauva estaina erdelya tuluva ter Ísac.” 8 Ta ná, i híni i hrávesse uar nanwave Eruo híni, mal i híni i ear i vandanen nar nótaine ve i erde. 9 An i quetta vando sie né: “Lúme sinasse nanwenuvan, ar euva yondo as Sara.” 10 Ananta lá rie mi tana natto: I imya martane íre Revecca óne onóni i imya nernen, Ísac atarelva. 11 An íre en uatte nóne, ar uatte acárie márie hya ulco – tyarien Eruo enne pa i cilme linga, lá cardassen, mal yesse yale – 12 náne quétina senna: “I amyára nauva mól i amnessan.” 13 Aqua ve ná técina: “Mélen Yácov, mal Ésau téven.”

CHAPTER 9
The truth I am telling in Christ – I am not lying, since my conscience is my witness with me, in the Holy Spirit – 2 that I have a great grief and a lingering pain in my heart. 3 For it is possible for me to wish that I were cut off as accursed from the Christ for the good of my brothers, my kin by the flesh, 4 who are Israelites, who were chosen as children and have the glory and the covenants and the giving of the Law and the service [núromolie: servant-work] and the promises, 5 they that have the fathers and from whom the Christ has his descent by the flesh. May God, who is above all, be blessed forever! Amen!
	6 But the matter is not as if God's word has failed. For not all that have their descent from Israel are truly Israel. 7 Furthermore, all among them are not children by being Abraham's seed, but: “What will be called your seed will come through Isaac.” 8 That is, the children in the flesh are not truly God's children, but the children that exist by the promise are being counted as the seed. 9 For the word of promise was thus: “At this time I shall return, and [there] will be a son with Sarah.”10 And yet not only in that matter: The same happened when Rebecca begat twins by the same man, Isaac our father. 11 For when they still were not born, and before they did good or evil – to make God's purpose concerning the choice depend, not on deeds, but on [the One] who calls – 12 it was said to her: “The oldest will be a thrall to the youngest.” 13 Just as is written: “I loved Jacob, but Esau I hated.”

	14 Tá mana quatuvalve? Ma ea úfailie as Eru? Laume! 15 An quetis Mósenna: “Oravuvan yesse oravuvan, ar tanuvan *ofelme yen tanuvan *ofelme!” 16 Etta i natto linga, lá yesse mere hya yesse nore, mal Erusse ye órave. 17 An i Tehtele quete Fáronna: “Sina ennen alávien lyen lemya, i lyesse tanuvan túrenya, ar carien essenya sinwa i quanda cemende.” 18 Sie é óravas yesse óravas, mal ye meris caris tarya.

	14 Then what are we to say? Is there unrighteousness with God? By no means! 15 For he says to Moses: “I will have mercy on whom I shall have mercy, and I will show sympathy to whom I shall show sympathy.” 16 Therefore the matter hangs, not on [the one] who wishes or on [the one] that runs, but on Gods who shows mercy. 17 For the Scripture says to Pharaoh:“For this purpose I have allowed you to remain, that in you I will show my power, and to make my name known on the entire earth.” 18 Thus he indeed shows mercy on [whomever] he shows mercy, but whom[ever] he wishes he makes hard.

19 Etta quetuval ninna: “Manen ná i en quetis in aiquen same cáma? An man opólie tare şelmaryanna?” 20 A atan – man, tá, elye ná ye hanquete nan Erunna? Lau ya anaie canta quetuva yenna acátie sa: “Mana castalya ni-carien sie?” 21 Hya ma i cemnaro ua same túre or i cén carien i imya umbollo vene alcarinqua ennen, ar exe ennen ya ua alcarinqua? 22 Mal á intya in Eru, ómu samis i túre tanien rúşerya ar carien túrerya sinwa, túra cólenen láve i venin rúşeva lemya, tai yar nar cárine náven nancárine, 23 carien sinwa úvea alcarerya i venin oraviéva, yar nóvo manwanes alcaren 24 – elve i yaldes lá rie i Yúrallon, mal yú et i nórellon. 
	25 Ta ná ve quetis Hoseasse: “I uar lienya estuvan lienya, ar ye úne melda, i melda; 26 ar i nómesse yasse náne quétina tien: 'Ualde lienya', tasse nauvalte estaine 'i coirea Eruo yondor'.” 

	 19 Therefore you will say to me: “How is [it] that he still says that anyone has guilt? For who has been able to stand against his will?” 20 O man – who, then, are you who answers back to God? Surely that which has been formed will not say to [the one] that has formed it: “What is your reason for making me so?” 21 Or does the potter not have power over the earth [or, clay] to make from the same lump a vessel for a glorious purpose, and another for a purpose that is not glorious? 22 But suppose that God, though he has the power to show his wrath and to make his power known, with great patience allowed the vessels of wrath to remain, those that are made to be destroyed, in order to make known his abundant glory to the vessels of mercy, that he beforehand prepared for glory – 24 we whom he called not from the Jews alone, but also out of the nations.
	25 That is as he says in Hosea: “[The ones] that are not my people I will call my people, and [the one] who was not beloved, the beloved; 26 and in the place where [it] was said to them: 'You are not my people', there they will be called 'sons of the living God'.”

27 Ar Isaia yame pa Israel: “Ómu Israelindion nóte ná ve earo litse, rie pitya lemyala ranta nauva rehtana. 28 An i Héru caruva onotie cemende, telyala sa ar nuhtala sa.” 29 Ente, ve Isaia quente nóvo: “Au i Héru Sevaot ua láve erde lemya ven, ollelve ve Sorom, ar anelve ve Omorra.”
	30 Tá mana quetuvalve? Úyúrar, ómu ualte roitane failie, ihírier failie – i failie ya tule saviénen. 31 Mal Israel, ómu roitanelte şanye failiéva, loitaner rahta sana şanyenna. 32 Manen sie? I castanen i roitaneltes, lá saviénen, mal ve cardainen. Talantelte i ondonen taltiéva, ve ná técina: “Yé, panyan Sionde sar taltiéva ar ondo lantiéva, mal ye save sasse ua nauva nucumna.”

27 For Isaiah cries about Israel: “Though the number of the Children of Israel is like the sand of the sea, only a small remaining part will be saved. 28 For the Lord will do an accounting on earth, completing it and cutting it short.” 29 Furthermore, as Isaiah said beforehand: “If the Lord Sebaoth did not allow a seed to remain for us, we became like Sodom, and we were like Gomorrah.” 
	30 Then what are we to say? Non-Jews, through they did not pursue righteousness, have found righteousness – the righteousness that comes by faith. 31 But Israel, though they pursued a law of righteousness, failed to reach the [demands of] that law. 32 How so? For the reason that they pursued it, not by faith, but as by deeds. They stumbled [slipped, fell down] by the rock of slipping, as is written: “Behold, I put in Zion a stone of slipping and a rock of falling, but [the one] who believes in it will not be humilated.”

RANTA 10 
Hánor, endanyo íre ar arcandenya tien Erunna ná i nauvalte rehtane. 2 An nanye astarmo tien i samilte uryala súle Erun, mal lá istyanen. 3 An pan ualte ista Eruo failie, mal nevir tulca véralta, ualte panyane inte nu Eruo failie. 4 An Hristo i Şanyeo metta ná, i ennen in ilquen ye save nauva quétina faila. 
	5 An Móses tece pa i failie ye tule i Şanyenen: “I atan ye acárie sa coituva sánen.” 6 Mal i failie ya tule saviello quete sie: “Áva queta endalyasse: Man ortuva mir menel?” – ta ná, talien i Hristo undu – 7 “hya: Man untuva mir i undume?” – ta ná, talien Hristo ama qualinallon. 8 Mal mana sa quete? “I quetta hare lyenna ná, antolyasse ar endalyasse” – ta ná, i quetta pa i savie, ya elme carir sinwa. 9 An qui antolyanen teal savielya i Yésus Heru ná, ar savil endalyasse in Eru ortane se et qualinallon, nauval rehtana. 10 An i endanen mo save, ya tala failie; i antonen mo tea ya mo save, ya tala rehtie. 

CHAPTER 10
Brothers, the desire of my heart and my petition for them to God is that they will be saved. 2 For I am a witness to them that they have a burning spirit for God, but not by knowledge. 3 For since they do not know God's righteousness, but try to establish their own, they did not subject themselves to [lit. put themselves under] God's righteousness. 4 For Christ is the end of the Law, for the purpose that everyone who believes will be pronounced just.
	5 For Moses writes concerning the righteousness that comes by the Law: “The man who has done it will live by it.” 6 But the righteousness that comes from believing speaks so: “Do not say in your heart: Who will go up into heaven?” – that is, to bring the Christ down – 7 “or: Who will descend into the abyss?” – that is, to bring Christ up from [the] dead. 8 But what does it say? “The  word is near to you, in your mouth and in your heart” – that is, the word about the faith, which we make known. 9 For if with your mouth you indicate your belief that Jesus is Lord, and you believe in your heart that God raised him out of [the] dead, you will be saved.10 For with the heart one believes, which brings righteousness; by the mouth one indicates what one believes, which brings salvation. 

	11 An i Tehtele quete: “Ye same estel sesse lá nauva nucumna.” 12 An i natto ua er i Yúran ar exe i Hellenyan; mal ea i imya Heru or illi, ye lára ná illin i yalir senna. 13 An “ilquen ye yale i Heruo essenen nauva rehtana”. 13 Ono manen yaluvalte senna yesse ualte save? Ar manen savuvalte sesse pa ye ualte ahlárie? Ar manen hlaruvalte qui penilte aiquen ye care sinwa i evandilyon? 13 Ar manen caruvaltes sinwa qui ualte mentane? Ve ná técina: “Manen vanime nát i talu ion talar máre sinyar mánaron!” 
	16 Mal illi mici te uar hilyane i evandilyon. An Isaia quete: “Héru, man sáve ta ya queni hlasser mello?” 17 Sie savie tule ho ta ya mo hlare, ar ta ya mo hlare tule i quetiénen pa Hristo.

	11 For the Scripture says: “[The one] who has hope in him will not be humiliated.” 12 For the matter is not one for the Jew and another for the Greek,, but [there] is the same Lord over all, who is rich towards all that call upon him. 13 For “everyone who calls on [lit. by] the Lord's name will be saved”. 13 But how will they call to him in whom they do not believe? And how will they believe in him about whom they have not heard? And how will they hear if they lack anyone that makes known the gospel? 13 And how will they make it known if they are not sent? As is written: “How beautiful are the feel of [those] that bring good news about good things!”
	16 But all among them did not follow the gospel. For Isaiah says: “Lord, who believed that which people heard from us?” 17 Thus believing comes from that which one hears, and that which one hears comes by the speaking about Christ. 

	18 Ananta maquetin: Ma é ualte ahlárie? É “mir i quanda cemen lammalta etelende, ar quetieltar mettannar ambaro.” 19 Mal maquetin: Ma Israel ua hanyane? Minyave Móses quente: “Tyarin *hrúcen mici le yanen ua nóre; tyarin le same rúşe úhanda nórenen!” 20 Mal Isaia ita canya ná ar quete: “Anen hírina lo i uar ni-cestane; anen carna sinwa in uar maquente pa ni.” 21 Mal pa Israel quetis: “Ter i quanda aure apantien mányat ana lie canwaracila ar váquetila.”

	18 And yet I ask: Have they indeed not heard? Indeed “into all the earth their sound went forth, and their sayings to the ends of the world.” 19 But I ask: Did Israel not understand? Firstly Moses said: “I cause envy among you by what is not a nation; I cause you to have wrath by an unintelligent nation.” 20 But Isaiah is very bold and says: “I was found by [the ones] that did not seek me; I was made known to [the ones] that did not ask about me.” 21 But concering Israel he says: “Through the entire day [= all day long] I have spread out my hands towards a people disobedient and contrary [canwaracila ar váquetila = command-breaking and saying no].” 

RANTA 11 
Maquetin, tá: Lau Eru hehtane lierya? Laume! An yú inye nér Israélo ná, Avrahámo erdeo, Venyamíno nosseo. 2 Eru ua hehtane lierya, ya nóvo sintes. Ma ualde ista ya i Tehtele quete pa Elía, íre arcas Erunna Israélen? 3 “Héru, anahtielte tercánolyar, anarcielte undu *yangwalyar, ar inye erinqua lemya, ar cestealte cuilenya.” 4 Mal mana i Eruquetta quete senna? “Alávien nerin húmi otso lemya nin, i uar uluhtayer occalta Vaalen.” 5 Mi lé sina, etta, yú lúme sinasse ea lemyala ranta, Erulisseo cilmenen. 6 Qui sa lisse ná, uas ambe cardainen; qui lá, i lisse uas ambe lisse.

I ask, then: Surely God has not abandoned his people? By no means! For also I am a man of Israel, of Abraham's seed, of the kin of Benjamin. 2 Eru did not reject his people, which beforehand he knew [or, recognized]. Do you not know what the Scripture says about Eliah, when he makes petition to God for Israel? 3“Lord, they have slain your prophets [or: heralds], they have torn down your altars, and I alone remains, and they are seeking my life.” 4 But what does the Word of God say to him? “I have let seven thousand men remain for me, that have not bent their knee to Baal.” 5 In this manner, therefore, also in this time [there] is a remaining part, by the choice of God's grace. 6 If it is grace, it is not by works [any]more; if not, the grace is not [any]more grace.

	7 Mana tá? Ya Israel cestea, ta uas eñétie, mal i cílinar eñétier sa. I exion tuntie olle
ilaica, 8 aqua ve anaie técina: “Eru ánie tien şúle núra húmeva, hendu yat uat cene ar hlaru yat uat hlare, tenna aure sina.” 9 Ente, Lavir quente: “Nai sarnolta nauva tien remma ar rembie ar casta lantien ar ahtarie; 10 nai hendultat oluvat morne loitieltan cene, ar illume cara pontelta cúna!”
	11 Etta maquetin: Ma talantelte lantien aqua? Laume! Mal taltieltanen ea rehtie i nórin, tyarien *hrúcen mici te. 12 Sí íre taltielta tala almare i marden, ar návelta nehtane tala almare i nórin, manen ita ambe quanta nótelta caruva sie!

	7 What then? [That] which Israel is seeking, that it has not got, but the chosen ones have got it. The perception of the others became blunt, 8 just as [it] has been written: “God has given them a spirit of deep sleep, eyes that do not see and ears that do not hear, until this day.” 9 Furthermore, David said: “May their table be for them a snare and an entrapping and a reason to fall and a revenge; 10 may their eyes be made dark for them to fail to see, and always make their back bent!” 
	11 Therefore I ask: Did they slip to fall completely? By no means! But by their slipping [there] is salvation for the nations, to cause envy among them. 12 Now when their slipping brings riches to the world, and their being deprived brings riches to the nations, how much more will their full number do so!

	13 Sí quétan lenna, i Úyúrar: Nála ya nanye, é i nórion apostel, laitan núromolienya, 14 qui ea lé yanen polin tyare *hrúcen imíca i nar hrávenyo ar rehta ennoli mici te. 15 An qui návelta hátine oa tala rainecarie i marden, mana návelta cámine taluva, qui lá coivie i qualinallon? 16 Ente, qui i minya massa airinta ná, tá i quanda maxe aire ná. Ar qui i şundo aire ná, sie nar i olvar. 17 Ono qui olvali náner rácine oa, mal elye, ómu nalye ráva *milpialda, náne panyana mir i alda mici tai ar camne ranta i laro i şunduo i *milpialdo, 18 áva laita imle or i olvar! Mal qui laitalyexe or tai, enyala in elye ua cole i şundo, mal i şundo cole lyé. 

	13 Now I am speaking to you, the non-Jews: Being what I am, indeed the apostle of the nations, I praise my ministry [núromolie: servant-work], 14 if [there] is a manner by which I can cause envy among [those] that are of my flesh and save some among them. 15 For if their being thrown away brings reconciliation [rainecarie, peace-making] to the world, what will their being received bring, if not life from the dead? 16 Furthermore, if the first portion is hallowed, then the whole dough is holy. And if the root is holy, so are the branches. 17 But if some branches were broken off, but you, though you are a wild olive tree, was put into the tree among them and received a part in the fat of the root of the olive tree, 18 do not praise yourself over the branches! But if you praise yourself over them, recall that you do not carry the root, but the root carries you.

19 Tá quetuval: “Olvali náner rácine oa návenyan panyana mir i alda.” 20 Mai: Peniénen saviéva anelte rácine oa, mal elye tare saviénen. Áva same varande noar, mal ruca! 21 An qui Eru ua láve i olvain i náner tasse nasseltanen lemya, mi imya lé uas lavuva elyen lemya. 22 Yé, tá, Eruo márie ar naracie: Innar lantaner ea naracie, mal elyenna ea Eruo márie, qui lemyalde márieryasse; qui lá, yú elye nauva aucirna. 23 Yú té, qui ualte lemya penieltasse saviéva, nauvar panyane mir i alda, an Eru pole panya te tar. 24 An qui anel hocirna *milpialdallo ya nassenen ráva ná, ar ara nasse anel panyana mir i *milpialda i tarwasse, manen ita ambe *aşcárima nauva in nassenen samir nómelta tasse náve panyane mir véra *milpialdalta!

19 Then you will say: “Some branches were broken off for me to be put into the tree.” 20 Well: By lack of faith they were broken off, but you stand by faith. Do not have lofty ideas, but fear! 21 For if God did not allow the branches that were there by their nature to remain, in the same manner he will not allow you to remain. 22 Behold, then, God's goodness and harshness: Towards [those] that fell [there] is harshness, but towards you [there] is God's goodness, if you remain in his goodness; if not, you all well will be cut off. 23 They as well, if they do not remain in their lack of faith, will be put into the tree, for God can put them there. 24 For if you were cut off from an olive tree which by nature is wild, and contrary to [ara = beside] nature you were put into the olive tree in the garden, how much more easy will it be for [those] that by nature have their place there to be put into their own olive tree!

25 An uan mere in elde, hánor, penuvar istya pa fóle sina, pustien le návello saile mi vére henduldat: Ea ranta Israélo ion tuntier olólier ilaice tenna utúlie i quanta lúme yasse i nórion quantie tuluva minna. 26 Ar sie quanda Israel nauva rehtana, ve anaie técina: “I *Rehtando tuluva Sionello ar queruva oa *ainolórie Yácovello. 27 Ar si ninya vére ná aselte, íre panyan úcariltar oa.” 28 Pa i evandilyon nalte ñottor castanen eldeo, mal pa i cilie nalte melde, castanen atariltaron. 29 An Eruo annar ar yalie uar nati pa yar samuvas tatye sanwi. 30 An ve elde vanwiesse rancer Eruo canwar, mal sí acámier oravie *canwaracieltanen, 31 sie yú té sí arácier i canwar, ya tyarne lé came oravie, i yú té sí camuvar oravie. 32 An Eru oiórie te illi canwaraciesse, oravien illisse mici te.

25 For I do not wish that you, brothers, are to lack knowledge about this secret, to stop you from being wise in your own eyes: [There] is a part of Israel whose perceptions have become blunt until the full time when the fullness of the nations shall come in. 26 And thus all of Israel shall be saved, as has been written: “The Savior shall come from Zion and will turn away godlessness from Jacob. 27 And this is my covenant with them, when I put their sins away.” 28 Concerning the gospel they are enemies by reason of you, but concerning the choosing they are beloved, by reason of their fathers. 29 For God's gifts and calling are not things about which he will have second thoughts. 30 For as you in the past broke God's commands, but now have received mercy by their disobedience [canwaracie: command-breaking], 31 so they as well have broken the commands, which caused you to receive mercy, that they as well will receive mercy. 32 For God has shut them all up [from yor-] in disobedience, to have mercy on all among them.

	33 Yé manen tumne Eruo lar ar sailie ar istya nar! Manen *alacestime namieryar, ar manen *alahírime tieryar! 34 An “man sinte i Héruo sáma, hya man peantane issen?” 35 Hya, “Man minyave antane sen ar camuva *paityale nan?” 36 An sello ar sénen ar sen nar ilye nati. Issen na i alcar tennoio! Násie.

	33 Behold how profound are God's riches and wisdom and knowledge are! How unsearchable his judgements, and how impossible to find his paths! 34 For “who knew the Lord's mind, and who instucted him?” 35 Or, “Who first gave to him and will receive a payment back?” 36 For from him and by him and to him are all things! To him be the glory forever! Amen.

RANTA 12 
Etta hortan le Eruo *ofelmenen, hánor, in antauvalde hroaldar ve coirea, aire *yanca, fastala Erun: núromolie handaleldanen; 2 ar áva na cátaine sina randanen, mal na vistaine i envinyatiénen sámaldava, lavila len name mana Eruo indóme ná, i mára ar fastala ar ilvana.
	3 An i Erulissenen antana nin nyarin ilquenen mici le: Áva sana pa imle ve tára lá ya mauya lyen sana, mal á sana mi lé antala mále sámo, ilquen ve Eru sen-ánie lesta saviéva. 4 An ve samilve er hroasse rimbe hroarantar, mal i hroarantar uar care i imya nat, 5 sie elve, ómu nalve rimbe, nar er hroa Hristosse, mal er ana er, quén i exeo hroarantar.  6 Samilve *alavéle annali i Erulissenen antana ven. Yen same apacen mauya *yuhta sa i lestanen saviéva sátina sen, 7 yen same núromolie mauya mole ve núro, i *peantaren mauya peanta, 8 hya yeo molie hortie ná, sen mauya horta; yen anta mauya anta alyave; yen tare epe i ocombe mauya panya endarya molieryasse; yen órava mauya care sie mi alasse!

CHAPTER 12
Therefore I urge you by God's compassion, brothers, that you will give your bodies as a living, holy sacrifice, pleasing to God: a service [núromolie, servant-work] with your understanding, 2 and do not be formed by this age, but be changed by the renewal of your mind, letting you judge what God's will is, the good and pleasing and perfect. 
	3 For by the grace given me I tell everyone among you: Do not think about yourself as higher than what it is necessary for you to think, but think in a manner giving health of mind, everyone as God has given him a measure of faith. 4 For as we have in one body many body-parts, but the body-parts do not do the same thing, 5 so we, though we are numerous, are one body in Christ, but one to one, one another's body-parts. 6 We have various gifts by the grace given us. For [the one] that has a prophecy it is necessary to use it by the measure of faith set aside to him, 7 to [the one] who has a ministry [núromolie, servant-work] it is necessary to work as a servant, for the teacher it is necessary to teach, 8 or [the one] whose work is to urge, for him it is necessary to urge; for [the one] who gives it is necessary to give richly, it ifor [the one] that stands before the congregation it is necessary to put his heart in his work; to [the one] showing mercy it is necessary to do so in joy!

	9 Melme na anwa! Á feuya ya olca ná; á himya ya mára ná. 10 Hánomelmelda quén i exeva na tumna! Ilquen na tanuva i exin áya túra lá ya arcas! 11 Áva na lence, hehtala i horme; na uryala i fairesse, na móli i Herun!

	9 [Let] love be real! Abhor what is wicked; stick to what is good. 10 [Let] your brotherly love for one another be profound! May everyone show the others a respect greater than he asks for! 11 Do not be slow, abandoning the urgency; be burning in the spirit, be thralls for the Lord!

12 Sama alasse i estelde! Na voronwe şangiesse! Á lemya hyamiesse! 13 Á anta ranta i airin, ve maureltar nar. Á hilya i melme etteleaiva! 14 Á aista i roitar – á aista ar áva húta! 15 Sama alasse as i samir alasse; na yaimie as i yaimear. 16 Na i imya sámo, quén i exenna; áva mere náve minde, mal na tulyaine lo i nalde nati. Áva ole saile vére henduldatse!
	17 Áva anta aiquenen ulco ulcun! Á tala ompa mánar epe ilye atani! 18 Qui ta cárima ná, hepa raine as ilye atani, quiquie ta ece len. 19 Áva ahtare inden, mal á anta nóme i rúşen, an ná técina: “Ahtarie ninya ná, quete i Héru; inye paityuva nan.” 20 Mal “qui ñottolya maita ná, ásen anta nat matien; qui náse soica, ásen anta nat sucien; an cariénen sie comyal uruiti *hyulmali caryasse.” 21 Áva na turúna ulcunen, mal turua ulco mariénen. 

12 Have joy in the hope! Be steadfast in tribulation! Remain in prayer! 13 Give a part to the holy ones, as their needs are. Follow the love for strangers! 14 Bless [the ones] that persecute – bless and do not curse! 15 Have joy with [those] that have joy; be wailing with the wailing ones. 16 Be of the same mind, one towards the other; do not wish to be prominent, but be led by the lowly things. Do not become wise in your own eyes! [dual]
	17 Do not give anyone evil for evil! Bring forward boons before all men. 18 If that is possible, keep peace with all men, whenever that is possible for you. 19 Do not take revenge for yourselves, but give room for the wrath, for [it] is written: “Revenge is mine, says the Lord; I shall pay back.” 20 But “if your enemy is hungry, give him something to eat; if he is thirsty, give him something to drink; for by so doing you gather fiery coals on his head.” 21 Do not be mastered by evil, but conquer evil by goodness.

RANTA 13 
Nai ilya quén panya immo nu i ambe táre héri, an lá ea hére hequa Erunen; i héri yar ear anaier panyane tasse lo Eru. 2 Etta ye tare i hérenna tare Eruo *partienna; i sanna atárier camuva námie intesse. 3 An i turir uar ruhtie i mára cardan, mal i ulcan. Elye mere i la mauyuva lyen ruce i hérello? Cara ya mára ná, ar camuval laitale sallo, 4 an nas Eruo núro márielyan. Mal qui caril ulco, tá ruca, an uas cole i macil ú casto. An nas Eruo tyaro, ahtarila túre ya tala rúşe yenna care ulco.
	5 Etta samilde maure panien inde nu i hére, lá rie castanen i rúşeo, mal yú castanen *immotuntieldo.

May every person subject himself to [lit. place himself under] the higher authorities, for there is not any authority except by God; the authorities that exist have been put there by God. 2 Therefore [he] who stands against the authority stands against God's arrangement; the ones that have stood against it will receive judgement in themselves. 4 For [the ones] that rule are not a terror to the good deed, but to the evil one. You wish that it will not be necessary for you to fear the authority? Do [that] which is good, and you will receive praise from it, 4 for it is God's servant for your good. But if you do evil, then fear, for it does not carry the sword without reason. For it is God's agent, an avenging power that brings wrath upon [the one] that does evil.
	5 Therefore you have need to subject yourselves under the authority, not only by reason of the wrath, but also by reason of your conscience.

	6 An ta yú ná i casta yanen paityalde *tungwi, an nalte Eruo núror, oi cimila sina enne. 7 Á anta illin rohtaldar tien: *tungwe yen arca *tungwe, paitie yen arca paitie, áya yen arca áya, alcar yen arca alcar.
	8 Áva sama rohta erya natwa aiquenen, hequa mele quén i exe, an ye mele armarorya aquantie i şanye. 9 An i axani: “Ávalye race vestale, Ávalye nahta, Ávalye pile, Ávalye na milca”,
ar ilye hyane axani, samir nonwelta quetta sinasse: “Alye mele armarolya ve imle.” 10 Melme ua care ulco ana i armaro; etta melme i şanye carna nanwa ná.
	11 Ente, cara sie pan istalde mana i lú ná, i yú sí utúlie i lúme cuivieldan húmello, an sí rehtielva ná hare epe ya anes íre camnelve savie. Etta alve panya oa i cardar yar nar morniéno ar alve panya visse i carmar calava. 13 Ve auresse, alve lenga mai, lá mi verce merendi ar *accasucier, lá mi *hrupuhtie ar lehta lengie, lá mi costie ar *hrúcen. 14 Mal á panya lesse i Heru Yésus Hristo, ar áva care panor i hráveo írin.

6 For that is also the reason for [-nen] which you pay taxes, for they are God's servants, ever heeding this purpose. 7 Give to all your debts to them: tax to the one that asks for tax, payment [paitie, paying] to the one that asks for payment, respect [áya = awe] to the one that asks for respect, glory to the one that asks for glory.
	8 Do not have a debt of a single thing to anyone, except to love one another, for [he] who loves his neighbor has fulfilled the law. 9 For the commandments: “Do not break marriage, Do not kill, Do not be greedy”, and all other commandments, have their sum in this word: “You are to love your neighbor as yourself.” 10 Love does not do evil against [one's] neighbor; therefore love is the law made true.
	11 Furthermore, do so since you know what the time is, that even now has come the time for awakening from sleep, for now our salvation is nearer than what it was when we received faith. Therefore let us put away the deeds that are of darkness and let us put upon ourselves the weapons of light. 13 As at day, let us behave well, not in wild parties and drunken bouts [accasucier, over-drinkings], not in fornication and loose conduct, not in quarreling or envy. 14 But put on yourselves the Lord Jesus Christ, and do not make plans for the desires of the flesh.

RANTA 14 
Cama i nér ye ná milya i saviesse, mal lá namien mitye sanweryar. 2 Er quén same savie matien ilqua, mal ye milya ná mate quear. 3 Ye mate áva nattire ye ua mate, ar ye ua mate áva name ye mate, an Eru acámie se. 4 Man elye namien exeo núro? Véra heruryan taris hya lantas. É taruvas, an ece i Herun tyaritas tare.

CHAPTER 14
Receive the man that is weak in the faith, but not in order to judge his inner thoughts. 2 One person has faith to eat everything, but [the one] who is weak eats vegetables. 3 [The one] that eats is not to despice [the one] that does not eat, for [he] who does not eat is not to judge [the one] who eats, for God has received him. 4 Who [are] you to judge another's servant? For his own lord he stands or he falls. Indeed he shall stand, for the Lord is able to cause him to stand.

	5 Er quén name er ré ve túra lá hyana ré; hyana quén name er ré ve ilye hyane rí; nai ilquen nauva aqua tanca véra sámaryasse. 6 Ye hepe i ré, hepe sa i Herun, ar ye mate, mate i Herun, pan antas hantale Erun; ar ye ua mate, ua mate i Herun, ananta antas hantale Erun. 7 É *úquen mici vi coita insen, ar *úquen quale insen, 8 an qui coitalve, coitalve i Herun, ar qui qualilve, qualilve i Herun. Sie, qui coitalve hya qui qualilve véla, nalve i Heruo. 9 An sina ennen Hristo qualle ar nanwenne coivienna: náven Heru qualinaron ar coirearon véla.
	10 Mal elye, mana castalya namien hánolya, hya mana castalya nattirien hánolya? An illi mici vi taruvar epe Eruo sonda anamo, 11 an ná técina: “Ve coitan, quete i Héru, ninna ilya occa cuvuva, ar ilya lamba laituva Eru.” 12 Sie ilquen mici vi antauva onótie pa inse Erun.
	
	5 One person judges one day as greater than another day; another person judges one day like all other days; may everone be wholly firm in his own mind. 6 [The one] who keeps the day, keeps it for the Lord, and [the one] who eats, eats for the Lord, since he gives thanks to the Lord; and [the one] who does not eat, does not eat for the Lord, and yet he gives thanks to God. 7 Indeed nobody among us lives for himself, and nobody dies for himself, 8 for if we live, we live for the Lord, and if we die, we die for the Lord. Thus, if we live or we if we die alike, we are the Lord's. 9 And for this purpose Christ died and came back to life: to be Lord of dead ones and of living ones alike.
	10 But you, what is your reason for judging your brother, or what is your reason for despicing your brother? For all among us will stand before God's seat of judgement, 11 for [it] is written: “As I live, says the Lord, to be every knee will bend, and every tongue will praise God.” 12 Thus everyone among us will give a reckoning of himself to God.

13 Etta ávalve name quén i exe, mal ambe ron cara si namielda: áva panya nat epe háno ya tyare se talta hya lanta. 14 An istan ar anaien lo i Heru Yésus tulyana i savienna i munta vahtana ná insasse; hequa íre atan note nat ve vahtana – issen nas vahtana. 15 An qui mattanen hánolya same naire, ualye ambe vanta melmenen. Áva mattalyanen nancare i quén yen Hristo qualle! 16 Etta áva lave aiquenen quete pa márielda yaiwenen. 17 An Eruo aranie ua matie ar sucie, mal failie ar raine ar alasse Aire Feanen. 18 An ye sie núro ná Hriston, fasta Eru ar anaie hirna mane lo atani. 

13 Therefore let us not judge one another, but sooner [= rather] make this your judgement: do not put [any]thing before a brother that causes him to slip or fall. 14 For I know and have been by the Lord Jesus led to the belief that nothing is defiled in itself, except when a man counts a thing as defiled – to him it is defiled. 15 For if by food your brother has grief, you no more walk by love. Do not by your food undo the person for whom Christ died! 16 Therefore do not let anyone speak about your [pl.] goodness with scorn. 17 For God's kingdom is not eating and drinking, but justice and peace and joy by Holy Spirit. 18 For who thus is a servant to Christ. pleases God and has been found good by men.

	19 Etta alve roita i nati yar tulyar rainenna ar i nati yar carastar quén i exe ama. 20 Áva mattan narca undu ya Eru acárie! Ilye nati é nar poice, mal nalte ulce atanen ye tunta sa ve lante íre matis. 21 Mára ná lá matie hráve hya sucie limpe hya carie *aiqua ya tyare hánolya lanta. 22 I savie ya samil, hepa sa imbe lyé ar Eru. Valima ná i quén ye ua tala namie insenna yanen quetis mára. 23 Mal qui savierya ua tanca, náse nóvo námina ulca qui matis, an uas mate et saviello. É ilqua ya ua et saviello úcare ná.

	19 Therefore let us pursue the things that lead to peace and the things that build one another up. 20 Do not for [the sake of] food tear down what God has made! All things are indeed clean, but they are evil to a man who perceives it as a fall when he eats. 21 [It] is good not to eat flesh or to drink vine or to do anything that causes your brother to fall. 22 The faith that you have, keep it between yourself and God. Happy is the person who does not bring judgement upon himself by [that] which he pronounces good [or, approves of]. 23 But if his faith is not firm, he is beforehand judged evil if he eats, for he does not eat out of faith. Indeed everything that is not out of faith is sin.

RANTA 15 
Mal i rohta elveo i nar tulce ná cole i milye sómar ion uar tulce, ar lá fasta inwe. 2 Ilquen mici vi na fastuva armaroryo, carastala se ama. 3 An yú i Hristo ua fastane inse, mal ve ná técina: “I narace quettar ion quenter naracave lyenna alantier ninna.” 4 An ilye i nati técine nóvo náner técine peantielvan, samielvan estel voronwielvanen ar i tiutalénen i Tehtelellon. 5 Sí nai Eru ye anta voronwie ar tiutale antauva len same i imya sóma sámo mici le ya Hristo Yésus sáme, 6 laitieldan er antonen Yésus Hristo Herulvo Aino ar Atar. 

CHAPTER 15
But the debt of us that are strong is to carry the weak states of [those] that are not strong, and not to please ourselves. 2 Let everyone among us please our neighbor, building him up. 3 For the Christ as well did not please himself, but as is written: “The harsh words of [those] who spoke harshly to you have fallen upon me.” 4 For all the things written beforehand were written for our instruction, for us to have hope by the steadfastness and by the comfort from the Scriptures.5 Now may God who gives steadfastness and comfort grant you to have the same state of mind among you that Christ Jesus had, 6 for you to praise with one mouth the God and Father of Jesus Christ our Lord. 

	7 Etta cama quén i exe, ve i Hristo camne ví, Eruo alcaren. 8 An quetin in Eruo voronwenen i Hristo anaie núro in nar *oscírine, carien tance i vandar i atarin, 9 tyarila i nóri laita Eru castanen failieryo. Ve ná técina: “Etta *etequentuvan lyé imíca i nóri, ar esselyan linduvan!” 10 Ar ata quetis: “Sama alasse, nóri, as lierya.” 11 Ar ata: “Á laita i Héru, ilye nóri, ar nai ilye i lier laituvar se!” 12 Ar ata eque Isaia: “Euva Yesseo şundo, ar ye orta turien nóri; sesse nóri panyuvar estelelta.” 13 Nai Eru ye anta estel quantuva illi mici le alassenen ar rainenen pan savilde, samieldan úve estelwa, i Aire Feo túrenen.

	7 Therefore receive one another, as the Christ received us, for the glory of God. 8 For I say that by God's faithfulness the Christ has been a servant to [those] that are circumcised, to make firm the promises to the fathers, 9 causing the nations to praise God by reason of his righteousness. As is written: “Therefore I will confess you among the nations, and to your name I will sing!” 10 And again he says: “Have joy, nations, with his people.” 11 And again: “Praise the Lord, all nations, and may all the peoples praise him!” 12 And again Isaiah said: “[There] will be the root of Jesse, and [he] who rises to rule nations; in him nations will put their hope.” 13 May God who gives hope fill all among you with joy and with peace since you believe, for you to have an abundance of hope, by the power of the Holy Spirit.

	14 Sí yú inye tulcave save pa lé, hánonyar, in elde nar quante máriéno, pan anaielde quátine ilya istyanen ar istar peanta quén i exe. 15 Mal pa natali técan len mi lé ita canya, ve qui tyarien le ata enyale –  i lissenen antana nin Erullo. 16 Sie nauvan Yésus Hristo núro i nórin, molila ve *airimo Eruo evandilyonen, i ennen in i nóri nauvar fastala *yanca, airinta Aire Feanen.
	17 Etta lertan laitaxe mi Hristo Yésus pa Eruo nati. 18 An uan verya nyare pa erya nat hequa yar Hristo acárie ter ní, ñetien canwacimie imíca i nóri – quettanen ar cardanen, 19 i túrenen tanwaron ar tannaron, i túrenen Aire Feo. Ar sie, Yerúsalemello ar rindesse tenna Illiricum, acárien sinwa i quanda evandilyon pa i Hristo. 

	14 Now I as well firmly believe concerning you, my brothers, that you are full of goodness, since you have been filled with all knowledge and know how to instruct one another. 15 But concerning some things I am writing to you in a manner very bold, as if to cause you to remember, by the grace given me from God. 16 Thus I will be Jesus Christ's servant for the nations, working as priest for God's gospel, for the purpose that the nations will be a pleasing sacrifice, hallowed by Holy Spirit.
	17 Therefore I may praise myself in Christ Jesus concerning God's things. 18 For I do not dare to tell of a single thing except [the ones] that Christ has done through me, to gain obedience among the nations – by word and by deed 19 by the power of signs and portents, by the power of Holy Spirit. And thus, from Jerusalem and in a circuit as far as Illyricum, I have made known the whole gospel about the Christ.

20 Sie é carin ennenya in uan caruva sinwa i evandilyon yasse Hristo esse anaie quétina nóvo, pustien imne carastiello hyana queno talmasse. 21 Mal ve ná técina: “I queni in únes carna sinwa cenuvar, ar i uar ahlárie hanyuvar.”
	22 Etta anen rimbave tapta tuliello lenna. 23 Mal sí, pan penin amba nóme mi ménar sine yasse polin care sinwa i evandilyon, ar pan imílien ter rimbe loar tule lenna, 24 samin estel sina: in íre lelyan Spanianna, ecuva nin vele le íre lahtuvan, ar i manyuvalde ni lelya tar íre nanye mi lesta quátina návenen aselde.
	25 Mal sí lelyuvan Yerúsalemenna náven núro i airin. 26 An i ear Maceroniasse ar Acaiasse sanner mai anta ranta armaltaron i penyain Yerúsalemesse.

20 Thus I indeed make [it] my goal that I will not make known the gospel where Christ's name has been spoken before, to stop myself from bulding on another person's foundation. 21 But as is written: “The people to whom he was not made known shall see, and [the ones] that have not heard will understand.”
	22 Therefore I was frequently impeded from coming to you. 23 But now, since I lack more room in these regions where I can make known the gospel, and since I have longed for many years to come to you, 24 I have this hope: that when I go to Spain, it will be possible for me to see you when I pass by, and that you will help me to travel thither when I am in [some] measure filled [= content] with your company [lit. by being with you].
	25 But now I will go to Jerusalem to be a servant to the holy ones. 26 For [those] that are in Macedonia and Achaia thought well to give a part of their goods to the poor ones in Jerusalem.

27 Care sie é náne mára mi hendulta, ananta anelte rohtandor tien, an qui i nóri samir ranta mi nattoltar faireva, yú rohtalte náve núror tien nattoinen i hráveo. 28 Etta, apa telyan si ar atálie comyane armar sine téna mi varnasse, autuvan ter vehtelda lendanyasse Spanianna. 29 Mal istan in íre tulin, tuluvan arwa quanta lesto aistiéva Hristollo.
	30 Sí hortan le, hánor, Herulva Yésus Hristonen ar melmenen i faireo, i carilde ilqua ya polilde óni hyamiessen Erunna inyen, 31 návenyan etelehtana illon uar save Yúreasse, ar i núromolienya Yerúsalemesse nauva mára i airin. 32 Sie, íre tulin lenna arwa alasseo, Eruo indómenen nauvan envinyanta aselde. 33 Nai i Aino ye anta raine euva as illi mici le! Násie!

27 To do so was indeed good in their eyes, and yet they were debtors to them, for if the nations have a part in their matters of spirit, they also owe to be servants for them with matters of the flesh. 28 Therefore, after I complete this and have brought these collected goods to them in safety, I will pass through your area on my journey to Spain. 29 But I know that when I come, I shall come having a full measure of blessing from Christ.
	30 Now I urge you, brothers, by our Lord Jesus Christ and by the love of the spirit, that you do all that you can with me in prayers to God for me, 31 for me to be delivered from [those] that do not believe in Judea, and that my service in Jerusalem will be to the liking of the holy ones [lit. will be good to the holy ones]. 32 Thus, when I come to you with joy, by God's will I will be renewed with you. 33 May God that gives peace be will all among you! Amen!

RANTA 16  
Antan len Foive néşalva, ye ná yú *veure i ocombeo mi Cencreai. 2 Áse came mi lé valda i airion, ar áse manya mi ilya natto yasse samis maure eldeva, an aváries rimbar, yú ní. 
	3 Á *suila Prisca yo Aquila, yet omóliet óni Yésus Hristosse, 4 yet panyanet véra axetta raxesse cuilenyan. Tún lá inye erinqua mal yú ilye i Úyúre ocombi antar hantale. 5 Ente, á *suila i ocombe coatto. Á *suila Epaineto meldanya, ye ná minya yáve Hriston Asiasse. 6 Á *suila María, ye acárie rimbe nati elden. 7 Á *suila Andronico yo Yúnia, yet nát nossenyo ar nánet óni mandosse. Samitte mára esse imíca i aposteli ar nánet Hristosse nó ni.

CHAPTER 16
I give you Phoebe our sister, who is also a deaconess of the congregation in Cenchreae. 2 Receive her in a manner worthy of the holy ones, and help her in every matter in which she has need of you, for she has protected numerous ones, me as well.
	3 Greet Prisca and Aquila, who have labored [dual] with me in Jesus Christ, 4 who [dual] put their own neck in danger for my life. To the, [dual] not I alone but also all the non-Jewish congregations give thanks. 5 Furthermore, greet the congregation of their [dual] house. Greet Epaenetus my beloved, who is a first fruit to Christ in Asia. 6 Greet Mary, who has done numerous things for you. 7 Greet Andronicus and Junia, who are [dual] of my kin and were with me in prison. They have a good name among the apostles, and were in Christ before me.

	8 Á *suila Ampliáto, meldanya i Hristosse. 9 Á *suila Urváno, ye omólie óni Hristosse, ar Stacis meldanya. 10 Á *suila Apelles, ye anaie tyastana i Hristosse. Á *suila i queni mi coarya Aristovúlo. 11 Á *suila Herolion, ye nossenyo ná. Á *suila i queni mi coarya Narcisso i nar i Herusse. 12 Á *suila Trifaina yo Trifósa, yet molit i Herusse. Á *suila Persis, i melda, an acáries rimbe mótier i Herusse. 13 Á *suila Rúfo, i cílina i Herusse, ar amillerya ar ninya. 14 Á *suila Asincrito, Flehon, Hermes, Patrovas, Hermas, ar i hánor aselte. 15 Á *suila Filolóho ar Yúlia, Nereo ar néşarya, ar Olimpas, ar ilye i airi aselte. 16 Á *suila quén i exe aire miquenen! Ilye Hristo ocombi *suilar le!
	17 Sí hortan le, hánor, i hepuvalde hendelda issen tyarir şancier ar taltier i peantiello ya camnelde, ar quera inde oa tello. 18 An taiti queni nar móli, lá Yésus Hriston, mál vére cumbaltain, ar vanime quettainen ar arwe lisso to lambalta tyarilte ranya i *cámalóraron enda.

	8 Greet Ampliatus, my beloved in Christ. 9 Greet Urbanus, who has labored with me in Christ, and Stachys my beloved. 10 Greet Apelles, who has been tested in the Lord. Greet the people in the house of Aristobulos. 11 Greet Herodion, who is of my kin. Greet the people in the house of Narcissus that are in the Lord. 12 Greet Tryphaena and Tryphosa, who toil [dual] in the Lord. Greet Persis, the beloved one, for she has done many works in the Lord. 13 Greet Ruphus, the chosen one in the Lord, and his mother and mine. 14 Greet Asyncritus, Phlegon, Hermes, Patrobas, Hermas, and the brothers with then. 15 Greet Philologus and Julia, Nereus and his sister, and Olympas, and all the holy ones with them. 16 Greet one another with a holy kiss! All of Christ's congregations greet you!
	17 Now I urge you, brothers, that you will keep your eye on those that cause splits and slippings from the teaching that you received, and turn yourselves away from them. 18 For such people are servants, not to Jesus Christ, but to their own bellies, and with fair words and having honey on their tongue they cause to stray the heart of the innocent ones.

19 An canwacimielda ná tuntaina lo illi. Etta nin-antalde alasse. Mal merin i nauvalde saile pa ya mára ná, mal *cámalóre pa ya ulca ná. 20 I Aino Raineva ron ascatuva Sátan nu taluldat. Nai Yésus  Herulvo lisse euva aselde! 21 Timoşéo, ye mole óni, *suila len, ar sie carir Lúcio ar Yáson ar Sosípater, i nar nossenyo. 22 Inye, Tertio, ye etécie tecetta sina, *suila le i Herusse. 23 Aio, ye acámie ni ar i quanda ocombe mir coarya, *suila le. Erasto, i osto cáno, *suila le, ar sie care Quarto hánorya. {24 Yésus Hristo Herulvo lisse na euva as illi mici le! Násie!} 
	25 Yen pole hepe le tulce i evandilyonnen ya tallen ar cariénen sinwa Yésus Hristo, i apantiénen i fóleva ya anaie hépina quildesse ter oireli, 26 mal sí anaie tanana ar carna sinwa i Erutercánoron tehtelessen mici ilye i nóri Eru Oiro canwanen, tyarien i savie náve címaina 27 – Erun, saila erinqua, na i alcar ter Yésus Hristo tennoio. Násie!
	
	19 For your obedience is being noticed by all. Therefore you give me joy. But I wish that you will be wise about that is good, but innocent about what is evil. 20 The God of Peace will soon crush Satan under your feet [dual]. May Jesus our Lord's grace be with you! 21 Timothy, who labors with me, greets you, and so do Lucius and Jason and Sosipater, that are of my kin. 22 I, Tertius, who has written this letter, greet you in the Lord. 23 Gaius, who has received me and the entire congregation into his house, greets you. Erastus, governor of the city, greets you, and so does Quartus his brother. {24 The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with all among you! Amen!} 
	25 To the One who can keep you firm by the gospel that I brought and by making known Jesus Christ, by the revelation of the mystery that has been kept in silence for eternities, 26 but now has been shown and made known by the writings of the Prophets among all the nations by the command of the Eternal God, to cause the faith to be heeded 27 – to God, wise alone, be the glory through Jesus Christ forever. Amen!